


Prince Richard, Duke of Gloucester (Richard Alexander Walter George; born 26 August 1944), is a member of the British royal family. He is the second son of Prince Henry, Duke of Gloucester, and Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester, the youngest of the nine grandchildren of George V, nephew of Edward VIII and George VI, and first cousin of Elizabeth II. He is 32nd in the line of succession to the British throne, and the highest person on the list who is not a descendant of George VI. At the time of his birth, he was fifth in line to the throne.


Richard practised as an architect until the death of his elder brother, William, placed him in direct line to inherit his father's dukedom of Gloucester, to which he succeeded in 1974. He married Birgitte van Deurs Henriksen on 8 July 1972. They have three children.


Early life

Richard was born at 12:15 pm on 26 August 1944 at St Matthew's Nursing Home in Northampton, the second son of Prince Henry, Duke of Gloucester, and Alice, Duchess of Gloucester. His father was the third son of King George V and Queen Mary. His mother was the third daughter of John Montagu Douglas Scott, 7th Duke of Buccleuch, and Lady Margaret Bridgeman. At the time of his birth, he was second in line to his father's dukedom, behind his elder brother, Prince William of Gloucester, who died in an air crash in 1972 before inheriting the title and having any children of his own.


Richard was baptised at the Royal Chapel of All Saints in Windsor Great Park on 20 October by the retired Archbishop of Canterbury, Cosmo Gordon Lang. His godparents were his paternal aunt Princess Mary, Queen Elizabeth, Princess Marie Louise (his first cousin twice removed), Princess Alice, Countess of Athlone (his grandaunt and first cousin twice removed, for whom her daughter, Lady May Abel Smith stood proxy), the Duke of Buccleuch (his maternal uncle), the Marquess of Cambridge (his cousin), Lady Sybil Phipps (his maternal aunt), and General the Earl Alexander of Tunis (for whom his wife, then Lady Margaret Alexander, stood proxy). Because of the War, newspapers did not identify the precise location of the christening, saying only that it took place at "a private chapel in the country". When Richard was four months old, he accompanied his parents to Australia, where his father served as governor-general from 1945 to 1947. The family returned to Barnwell Manor in 1947, where Richard spent most of his childhood.


Education and career

Richard's early education took place at home, under the instruction of Rosalind Ramirez, who had also tutored young King Faisal II of Iraq; later, he attended Wellesley House School at Broadstairs and Eton College. In 1963, he matriculated at Magdalene College, Cambridge, where he studied architecture, graduating with the degree of Bachelor of Arts in June 1966. As is customary at Cambridge, this proceeded to MA (Cantab) in 1971.


In 1966, Richard joined the Offices Development Group in the Ministry of Public Building and Works for a year of practical work. He returned to Cambridge in 1967, completing both parts of the Diploma in Architecture degree in June 1969. Upon passing his exams, he became a practising partner with Hunt Thompson Associates, Architects, in London.


Marriage and family




On 8 July 1972, Richard married Danish-born Birgitte van Deurs Henriksen at St Andrew's Church, Barnwell, Northamptonshire; the Duke and Duchess of Gloucester have three children:


The Duke and Duchess of Gloucester's official residence is at Kensington Palace in London. They have leased their private home, Barnwell Manor, since 1994. In September 2022, the Duke put the manor up for sale for £4.75 million.


Activities

Richard ended his architectural career in 1972, after the death of his elder brother Prince William, who was killed in an air crash during a flying competition. Richard became heir apparent to his father's dukedom and had to take on additional family obligations and royal duties on behalf of the Queen. He became Duke of Gloucester on his father's death on 10 June 1974.


He has been a corporate member of the Royal Institute of British Architects since 1972. He is president of the Society of Architect Artists, an honorary fellow of the Institution of Structural Engineers, and was a trustee of the British Museum, deputy chairman of the Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission for England and a commissioner of English Heritage between 1998 and 2001. He has been patron of construction charity Construction Youth Trust for many years. With his background in architecture, the Duke of Gloucester takes interest in the work of the trust and visits their projects, in addition to giving his name to their long standing Duke of Gloucester Young Achiever's Scheme Awards. He is patron of the Architects Benevolent Society. The Duke is vice president of Lepra, a UK-based leprosy charity; as part of this role, he attends national and international events in support of the charity's work. He is royal patron of the Society of Antiquaries of London (and elected FSA) since 2001, royal patron of the UK branch of the charity Habitat for Humanity, royal patron of the St George's Society of New York, and president of The London Society. A keen motorist, Richard passed the Advanced Driving Test of the Institute of Advanced Motorists, of which he was president for more than 32 years. On his appointment in 1971, it was recorded that the new president was "currently  an Austin 1300", reflecting the modest image with which he has always been identified. He stood down as president in January 2005.


The Duke of Gloucester, accompanied by the Duchess, represented his cousin Elizabeth II at the Seychelles independence ceremonies on 26 June 1976 and again at the Solomon Islands independence celebrations on 7 July 1978. He served as a judge in Prince Edward's charity television special The Grand Knockout Tournament on 15 June 1987.


On 10 April 2008, the Duke of Gloucester was officially installed as inaugural Chancellor of the University of Worcester during a ceremony at Worcester Cathedral. In this role, he officiates at degree ceremonies and major events, as well as promoting the university overseas. The Duke carried out the first of these duties on 5 and 6 November 2008 at the Graduation Award Ceremonies. The Duke is a patron of the Severn Valley Railway and the Pestalozzi International Village Trust. He is patron of the British Homeopathic Association. He shares a name with an earlier Duke of Gloucester, Richard III, and has been patron of the Richard III Society since 1980. He is a member of the international advisory board of the Royal United Services Institute.


During 2009, the Duke became patron of the de Havilland Aircraft Heritage Centre in support of its bid to raise funds through private means and through a bid for Heritage Lottery Funding. Other patronages include: British Society of Soil Science, the International Council on Monuments and Sites, Action on Smoking and Health, British Association of Friends of Museums, British Mexican Society, St Bartholomew's Hospital, as well as numerous other organisations and charities. In July 2011, the Duke visited the Isle of Man to meet with the representative of Manx National Heritage and the Council of Cancer Charities. On 8 November 2011, he opened the new Law School Building at the University of Hertfordshire on the de Havilland campus site of the former de Havilland Aircraft factory. On 19 March 2013, the Duke represented Elizabeth II at the Vatican for the inauguration of Pope Francis.


On 11 March 2015, the Duke visited the Royal School Dungannon in County Tyrone to celebrate the 400th anniversary of the founding of the school; presenting a commemorative plaque and raising an anniversary flag on the grounds. On 22 and 26 March 2015, the Duke represented the Queen at the ceremonies marking the reburial and commemorations of King Richard III in Leicester Cathedral. Richard III had held the title Duke of Gloucester before his ascension to the English throne. In March 2018, the Duke travelled to Malawi to attend the Commonwealth Day celebrations, and visited projects related to health services, wildlife, and climate change. He missed the celebrations in March 2022 after testing positive for COVID-19.


On 14 September 2022, after the death of Queen Elizabeth II on 8 September, the Duke joined her children, grandsons, nephew, and son-in-law, in walking in the state cortege from Buckingham Palace to Westminster Hall, for her lying in state.


In 2023 the Duke and Duchess of Gloucester attended the coronation of King Charles III and Queen Camilla in Westminster Abbey, and (in common with other working members of the royal family) took part in the Coronation Procession following the service.


Titles, styles, honours and arms

Titles and styles

Richard was originally styled "His Royal Highness Prince Richard of Gloucester".
Since becoming duke in 1974, he has been known as "His Royal Highness The Duke of Gloucester".


Honours

letters


Wear of orders, decorations, and medals

The ribbons worn regularly by Richard in undress uniform are as follows:


Honorary military appointments

Non-national titles and honours

Scholastic

Civic

Arms

Issue

Ancestry

See also

References

External links

