Rafael of Orléans-Braganza (Portuguese: Rafael de Orléans e Bragança; born 24 April 1986) is a member of the Imperial House of Brazil. He is the heir presumptive to his childless uncle, Prince Bertrand, the current head of the Vassouras branch of the House of Orléans-Braganza and one of the claimants to the defunct Brazilian Throne. Rafael became heir presumptive following the death of his father, Prince Antônio, in November 2024. He is a three-times-great-grandson of Brazil’s last emperor, Dom Pedro II, and is among the few living descendants of the former Brazilian imperial family in the direct male line; as second in line to the extinct Imperial Throne, he is the current holder of the title of Prince of Grão-Pará. 


Family

Born in Petrópolis, Brazil on 26 April 1986, he is the third child and second son of Prince Antônio de Orleans e Bragança and Princess Christine of Ligne. He has an older brother and sister, Prince Pedro Luiz and Princess Amélia and a younger sister, Princess Maria Gabriela. His name in full is Rafael Antonio Maria José Francisco Miguel Gabriel Gonzaga de Orléans e Bragança e Ligne.


His paternal grandparents were Prince Pedro Henrique of Orléans-Bragança, one of two claimants to be head of the Brazilian Imperial House, and Princess Maria Elisabeth of Bavaria. His maternal grandparents were Antoine, 13th Prince of Ligne, and Princess Alix of Luxembourg. His mother's family, the House of Ligne, is one of the oldest and most prominent Wallonian noble families still extant in Belgium. Christine is a niece of Grand Duke Jean, who reigned in Luxembourg until his abdication in 2000.


Personal life

Rafael has a degree in manufacturing engineering from Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro, working at the InBev subsidiary in London. He is fluent in English, French, Spanish and Portuguese, and also has a predilection for football, being an avowed supporter of Fluminense FC.


Rafael also has a partnership and a tourism enterprise with headquarters in New York, Paris and Rio de Janeiro.


Rafael has expressed in statements his desire to marry a princess who is part of "Catholic royalty or high nobility".


Appointments

In February 2022, after the floods that devastated the city of Petrópolis, Rafael came to the aid of the victims, bringing them essential goods that the imperial house received from monarchist supporters.


In November 2022, on the occasion of the World Cup, Prince Raphael was invited to attend the game by the embassy of the state of Qatar in London, the capital of the United Kingdom, where the prince currently resides and works. The prince is the guest of honor at the opening game of the Brazilian National Team against the Serbian National Football Team, at the Lusail Stadium, in Qatar.


Honors

Genealogy

Ancestry

Patrilineal descent

Rafael is a member of the House of Orléans-Braganza, a sub-branch of the House of Bourbon, itself a branch of the House of Capet and of the Robertians.


Rafael's patriline is the line from which he is descended father to son. It follows the Dukes of Orléans, the Kings of France, the Dukes and Counts of Vendôme, the Counts of La Marche, the first Duke of Bourbon, a Count of Clermont, and before them, again the Kings of France. The line can be traced back more than 1,200 years and is one of the oldest in Europe.


See also

References

External links

