Carl Herzog von Württemberg (Carl Maria Peter Ferdinand Philipp Albrecht Joseph Michael Pius Konrad Robert Ulrich; 1 August 1936 – 7 June 2022) was the head of the House of Württemberg from 1975 to 2022. He was succeeded by his grandson Wilhelm.


Life

Carl was born in Friedrichshafen on 1 August 1936. He was the second son of Philipp Albrecht, Duke of Württemberg, and Archduchess Rosa of Austria, Princess of Tuscany. He was educated at the classical grammar school in Riedlingen and the University of Tübingen, where he studied law. After graduating, he joined the family estate business, based at Altshausen Palace.


Carl became heir-presumptive to the headship of the House of Württemberg on 29 June 1959, when his older brother, Ludwig, renounced his succession rights. He became head of the family when his father died 15 April 1975. The family company manages around 5500 hectares of forest, around 2000 hectares of meadows and fields, fifty hectares of vineyards, other land in Germany and abroad, forests in Canada and Austria, and company holdings. It also maintains some seventy cultural monuments of the House of Württemberg. The current headquarters of the estate is Friedrichshafen Castle. 


On 7 June 2022, Carl died in a hospital in Ravensburg at the age of 85. He was succeeded by his grandson Wilhelm since Carl's eldest son Friedrich had predeceased him.


Charitable activities

Carl took part in many social and charitable activities, including the German Red Cross, the Friends of Cancer Children, the Free School Foundation, the Art Foundation, the Preventive Youth Welfare Foundation, and the Baden-Württemberg Monument Foundation, which he chaired from 2002 to 2008. He was Patron of the Society for the Promotion of the State Museum of Württemberg, and chairman of the Friends of the University of Tübingen and the University Foundation. In Altshausen, where he lived, he was Patron of the Citizens Guard Yellow Hussars.


On 30 July 2002 Carl and his wife Diane met with President of Lebanon Emile Lahoud and his wife at the Baabda Palace in Beirut to discuss a project to assist deprived Lebanese children as well as other social and cultural activities.


Marriage and issue

On 21 July 1960, Carl married Princess Diane d'Orléans, the daughter of Prince Henri, Count of Paris, and his wife Princess Isabelle of Orléans-Braganza. The wedding took place at Schloss Altshausen, the ancestral seat of the Dukes of Württemberg.


They had four sons and two daughters and sixteen grandchildren:


Honours and awards

House of Württemberg

States

Formerly reigning families

Religious orders

Academic institutions

Ancestry

References

