


David Henry George Lascelles, 8th Earl of Harewood (born 21 October 1950), styled as Viscount Lascelles until July 2011, is a British hereditary peer and film and television producer.


Early life and earldom

David Henry George Lascelles was born at his parents' London house, 2 Orme Square, Bayswater, London, on 21 October 1950. He is the eldest son of the 7th Earl of Harewood and his first wife, Marion Stein. He was baptised at All Saints' Church, Harewood. His father was a first cousin of Queen Elizabeth II. His godparents were The Princess Elizabeth, Duchess of Edinburgh (later Queen Elizabeth II), his great-grandmother Queen Mary, his great-aunt Viscountess Boyne (Margaret Hamilton-Russell), his uncle Gerald Lascelles and Benjamin Britten. At birth, he was 13th in line to the throne. As of 2025, he is 65th in line.


He is a second cousin of King Charles III and a great-grandson of King George V.


He succeeded to the Earldom of Harewood on the death of his father in July 2011.


Career and other activities

Lascelles is a film and television producer. He produced nine episodes of the 1990s TV detective series, Inspector Morse.


In 2007, as part of the commemoration of the bi-centenary of the Abolition of the Slave Trade Act, Lascelles was executive producer of the theatrical project by Geraldine Connor entitled Carnival Messiah that was staged in the grounds of Harewood House, which was built in the 18th century with funds from slave trading. Following Connor's death in 2011, Lascelles organised a concert in her memory at West Yorkshire Playhouse, and he is a founder and patron of the Geraldine Connor Foundation, established in 2012 to continue her work and vision by bringing people together through arts and culture.


As Earl of Harewood, he continues the tradition begun by his father in 1961 by serving as the honorary lifetime president of Leeds United Football Club.


In April 2023 he co-founded, with former BBC journalist Laura Trevelyan and others, Heirs of Slavery, a group of descendants of people who had profited from British transatlantic slavery and wanted to make amends in the form of reparations. Other members include Charles Gladstone, who is descended from prime minister William Gladstone, and journalist Alex Renton. The group has called on the British prime minister and King Charles III to make a formal apology on behalf of the United Kingdom.


Awards

Inspector Morse won a BAFTA in 1991. It is on display in one of the bookcases at Harewood House.


Personal life

On 12 February 1979, at St Mary's Church, Paddington, London, Lascelles married Margaret Rosalind Messenger, Viscountess Lascelles, daughter of Edgar Frank Messenger. The marriage was dissolved in 1989.


Their children are:


In 1990, Lascelles married artist Diane Howse, now the Countess of Harewood.


Ancestry

Filmography

His work includes:


References

External links

