


Lord Frederick Michael George David Louis Windsor (born 6 April 1979) is a member of the British royal family. He is the only son of Prince and Princess Michael of Kent, and is 54th in the line of succession to the British throne. He is married to British actress Sophie Winkleman and is a financial analyst by profession. As a great-grandchild of King George V and Queen Mary, he is a second cousin of King Charles III.


Early life and education

Frederick Michael George David Louis Windsor was born on 6 April 1979 at St Mary's Hospital, London, and was christened on 11 July at the Chapel Royal, St James's Palace, Westminster. A first cousin once removed of Queen Elizabeth II and a first cousin twice removed of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, he is therefore both a second cousin and a second cousin once removed of King Charles III and his siblings. He is 54th in the line of succession to the British throne.  


Frederick and his sister, Lady Gabriella, were brought up in the Church of England. 


He was educated at Wetherby School, Sunningdale, and Eton College, where he was an Oppidan Scholar, then at Magdalen College, Oxford, where he gained a 2:1 degree in Classics.


Career

After graduating, Frederick worked as a fashion model, appearing in a campaign for Burberry and for the designer Tomasz Starzewski, and also as a music journalist, notably for Tatler magazine. He initially planned to qualify as a solicitor specialising in entertainment law, but by September 2006, according to The Times, he was working as an analyst in the wealth management arm of JP Morgan in London. 
He is now a banker and executive director at JPMorgan Chase, and is a CFA charterholder, having received his charter in 2013.


Personal life

On St Valentine's Day, 14 February 2009, Frederick became engaged to the actress Sophie Winkleman. The Queen consented to the marriage, as required by the Royal Marriages Act 1772, and the couple were married at Hampton Court on 12 September 2009.


Their first child, Maud Elizabeth Daphne Marina, was born on 15 August 2013 at Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center in Los Angeles. She was baptised at St James's Palace in December 2013 and has Princess Eugenie among her godparents. Maud served as a bridesmaid at the wedding of Princess Eugenie and Jack Brooksbank in 2018.


On 20 January 2016, it was announced Frederick and Sophie had become parents to a second daughter, Isabella Alexandra May, who was born on 16 January 2016 at Chelsea and Westminster Hospital in London. She was baptised at Kensington Palace in June 2016, with Jamie Oliver, a close friend of her mother, serving as one of the godparents.


From September 2016 until its closure in 2023, Frederick was president of the charity Soldier On!, which supported vulnerable, disadvantaged, or socially isolated people through archaeology and heritage projects as well as personal development workshops.


On 21 February 2017, Frederick was inducted into the Grand Order of Water Rats charitable fraternity.


Titles and styles

Under letters patent issued in 1917 and still in force today, Frederick's father is entitled to the dignity of prince and the style His Royal Highness as the son of a son of George V. Although these letters do not bestow these royal dignities beyond grandchildren of monarchs (except in the case of the children of the Prince of Wales, as modified by Elizabeth II), they allow the children of sons of sons of a British monarch to be styled as the children of a duke, with the honorific courtesy style of Lord or Lady before their given names. Since Lord Frederick is not a peer in his own right, his style is not hereditary and his children are not entitled to any distinctions, including the prefix The Honourable.  They do, however, follow him in the line of succession to the British throne.


Honours

References

