


Lady Sarah Frances Elizabeth Chatto (née Armstrong-Jones; born 1 May 1964) is a member of the British royal family. She is the only daughter of Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon, and Antony Armstrong-Jones, 1st Earl of Snowdon. She and her brother, David Armstrong-Jones, 2nd Earl of Snowdon, are the only maternal first cousins of King Charles III. At her birth, she was 7th in line to the British throne; as of 2026, she is 29th. Though she does not undertake public duties, she frequently attends events and ceremonies with the wider royal family.


Early life and education

Lady Sarah Frances Elizabeth Armstrong-Jones was born at 8:20 am on 1 May 1964 at Kensington Palace in London. She is the second child and only daughter of Princess Margaret and Antony Armstrong-Jones, 1st Earl of Snowdon. She was baptised in the private chapel at Buckingham Palace on 13 July.


Sarah is a godmother to Prince Harry, Duke of Sussex, Lady Rose Gilman, and Lady Louise Windsor. She also has half-siblings on her father's side: Polly Fry (born 1960), Lady Frances Armstrong-Jones (born 1979), and Jasper Cable-Alexander (born 1998).


Sarah and her brother, David, then Viscount Linley, grew up in the nursery of Kensington Palace, Apartment 10. They were raised with a nanny called Verona Sumner, although their parents, especially their father, were comparatively hands-on (for the time), with their father teaching them to build things and be creative.


Their parents' marriage was fractious; the couple formally separated when Sarah was 12 and divorced when she was 14. She and her brother spent weekends, depending on with which parent, at either Nymans or Royal Lodge. Holidays were given to the royal estates at Sandringham and Balmoral, where Sarah did landscape painting.


Sarah was a bridesmaid at the wedding of her cousin Charles, Prince of Wales, and Lady Diana Spencer. She accompanied her mother and brother on an official visit to China and Hong Kong in May 1987.


She attended Bedales School, which she left with a single A level in Art. She enrolled at the Camberwell School of Art. She also studied art at the Royal Academy Schools. She then spent two years in India with her father, where he was employed to photograph the production of A Passage to India. The film's producer, her relative John Knatchbull, 7th Baron Brabourne (son-in-law of Louis Mountbatten, 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma), gave her a job as an intern assisting the wardrobe department and studying wood gilding under her father's cousin Thomas Messel. Returning to England, she enrolled in a two-year course in textile and fabric design at Middlesex Polytechnic (later renamed as Middlesex University).


Professional life

Chatto has been exhibiting her work, always under the name Sarah Armstrong-Jones, at The Redfern Gallery since 1995. Her work has won awards: the Winsor & Newton Prize in 1988 and the Creswick Landscape Prize in 1990.


In 2004, she became vice president of the Royal Ballet, of which her mother had been president. She was named president in 2024.


Chatto does not undertake public duties and is not considered a "working royal". However, it has been reported that she was close to her aunt Queen Elizabeth II. Chatto is frequently seen attending public events such as jubilees and funerals, as well as semi-private royal family events, such as the Sandringham Christmas service, with her sons.


Marriage and children

Sarah met Daniel Chatto during her years in India with her father in the 1980s. Chatto was working on another British film, Heat and Dust. He is from a theatrical family, the son of actor Tom Chatto (1920–1982) and the theatrical agent Ros Chatto (born Rosalind Joan Thompson; died 2012). He proposed to her with a "vintage cluster ring."


The couple married on 14 July 1994; the Reverend Chad Varah, founder of the Samaritans, officiated at the wedding, held at St Stephen's, Walbrook in the City of London. The bride's wedding gown was designed by Jasper Conran. Her bridesmaids were half-sister Lady Frances, Zara Phillips (daughter of her first cousin Princess Anne), and Tara Noble-Singh, a family friend.


The couple have two sons:


Notes

References

External links

