


Lady Marina Charlotte Alexandra Katharine Helen Windsor (born 30 September 1992) is a British philanthropic executive and relative of the British royal family. Although she is a great-great-granddaughter of King George V, and a second cousin once removed of King Charles III, she was removed from the line of succession to the British throne in 2008 after being confirmed into the Roman Catholic Church. She works as a philanthropic executive at The Big Give.


Early life, family, and education

Lady Marina Charlotte Alexandra Katharine Helen Windsor was born on 30 September 1992 at the Rosie Hospital in Cambridge, Cambridgeshire, the second child of George Windsor, Earl of St Andrews, a diplomat and member of the House of Windsor, and Sylvana Tomaselli, a Canadian historian and member of the Austrian-Italian Tomaselli family. Her older brother is Edward Windsor, Lord Downpatrick, and her younger sister is Lady Amelia Windsor. She is a paternal granddaughter of Prince Edward, Duke of Kent, who is a first cousin of Elizabeth II, and Katharine, Duchess of Kent, the only daughter of Sir William Worsley, 4th Baronet. Marina is named after her great-grandmother Princess Marina of Greece and Denmark.


On 21 January 1993, Marina was christened Marina Charlotte Alexandra Katharine Helen Windsor in a Church of England ceremony by William Booth, the sub-dean of the Chapel Royal at St James's Palace. Her godparents are Lady Ralph Kerr, Katherine Ruth Panter, William Hanbury-Tenison, and Sasha Poklewski-Koziell.


Marina attended St Mary's School, Ascot, a Roman Catholic boarding school for girls. She served as deputy head girl at St Mary's. She went on to study French and Portuguese languages at the University of Edinburgh, where she was active in dramatic societies and wrote for the student publication Y-Magazine.


Succession rights

Until 2008, Marina was 25th in the line of succession to the British throne. She forfeited her place in the line of succession, in compliance with the Act of Settlement 1701, along with her older brother, after being confirmed in the Catholic Church of her mother and paternal grandmother.


Career

In 2010, Marina modelled for Hardy Amies in Tatler alongside her siblings. She later expressed interest in working in foreign diplomacy and not a modelling career. She has worked on the New Generation festival in Florence. After completing school, she worked for a number of charities including Veterans Aid, Beat Routes Charity, Eco-nnect, and The Big Give, working at the latter as a philanthropic executive.


Personal life

She attended the wedding of her third cousin Prince William, Duke of Cambridge to Catherine Middleton in 2011.


In May 2012, Marina travelled to Thailand, where she trained in Muay Thai boxing.


She announced her engagement to Nico Macauley on 8 June 2025. He is a great-grandson of William Berry, 1st Viscount Camrose and a maternal first cousin of the actor Joshua Sasse.


References

