


Prince Luiz of Orléans-Braganza (6 June 1938 – 15 July 2022) was a Brazilian royal claimant who served as head of the Vassouras branch of the Imperial House of Brazil from 1981 until his death. He was the eldest son of Prince Pedro Henrique of Orléans-Braganza and Princess Maria Elisabeth of Bavaria, and was regarded by his supporters as pretender to the defunct title of Emperor of Brazil.


The Vassouras branch asserts its claim to the former Brazilian throne in opposition to the Petrópolis branch, led by Pedro Carlos Orléans-Braganza. Both Luiz and Pedro Carlos were great-grandsons of Princess Isabel, daughter and heiress of Emperor Pedro II, but the two lines diverged following a dynastic dispute involving their fathers, who were first cousins. Throughout his life, Prince Luiz actively upheld the Vassouras claim, engaging in public discourse, monarchist movements, and initiatives related to Brazil’s imperial history and legacy.


Early life

Luiz Gastão Maria José Pio was born on 6 June 1938 in Mandelieu-la-Napoule, France, as the oldest son of Pedro Henrique of Orléans-Braganza, the Vassouras great-grandson of Emperor Pedro II of Brazil, and his wife, Maria Elisabeth of Bavaria, granddaughter of King Ludwig III of Bavaria.


Prince Luiz was born after the revocation of the exile that had been imposed on the Imperial family by Brazil's first Republican government. The aftermath of World War I and World War II detained the entire family in Europe until 1945, when the Vassouras branch of the family was finally repatriated, settling first in the town of Petrópolis (Rio de Janeiro), then to Jacarezinho (Paraná).


In 1957, Prince Luiz returned to Europe to finish his studies, where he graduated in chemistry at the University of Munich. Returning to Brazil in 1967, his family having already moved to Vassouras (Rio de Janeiro), Luiz became a member of the Society for the Defense of Tradition, Family and Property, a traditionalist Catholic organization which opposes socialistic land reform and supports conservative politics based on Catholic social doctrine and the principles promoted by Plinio Corrêa de Oliveira. Alongside Duarte Pio, Duke of Braganza, his Portuguese counterpart and second cousin, he opposed same-sex marital unions, as of a 2015 declaration.


Succession

On 1981, he succeeded Prince Pedro Henrique as the claimant to the Brazilian throne in the Vassouras branch. According to Brazilian legitimist claims, he was de jure Emperor of Brazil ("Dom Luiz I of Brazil").


He and two of his younger brothers, Prince Bertrand and Prince Antônio, engaged in monarchist proselytism in Brazil. They played major roles during the campaign for the 1993 plebiscite, which represented the first official opportunity for a return of the monarchy to Brazil since the Proclamation of the Republic in 1889. In it, the people were asked to choose which form of government, presidential or parliamentary, and which form of state organization, republic or constitutional monarchy, Brazil should have. The monarchist cause was not successful, receiving 13.2% of the vote against 66% for the republic.


Dom Luiz resided in a house with "no luxury nor splendor" in Higienópolis, a borough of São Paulo, Brazil.


Death

Prince Luiz died in São Paulo on July 14, 2022 having been hospitalized for a month. On the following day, Brazilian president Jair Bolsonaro and the Minister of Foreign Affairs signed a decree declaring a national day of official mourning for the death of Luiz.


Honours

As Head of the House of Orléans-Braganza, Prine Luiz Gastão held the following positions:


Prince Luiz has also been decorated with a number of other honours:


Ancestry

References

External links

