Princess Beatrix*


Princess Margriet*Pieter van Vollenhoven*


Princess Ariane of the Netherlands, Princess of Orange-Nassau (Ariane Wilhelmina Máxima Inés, .mw-parser-output .IPA-label-small{font-size:85%}.mw-parser-output .references .IPA-label-small,.mw-parser-output .infobox .IPA-label-small,.mw-parser-output .navbox .IPA-label-small{font-size:100%}pronounced ; born 10 April 2007) is the third and youngest daughter of King Willem-Alexander and Queen Máxima. Princess Ariane is a member of the Dutch royal house and currently third in the line of succession to the Dutch throne.


Life

Princess Ariane was born in the HMC Bronovo  in The Hague at 21:56 local time on 10 April 2007 as the third child and youngest daughter of King Willem-Alexander and Queen Máxima of the Netherlands. Prime Minister Balkenende addressed the nation shortly afterwards and said both mother and child were healthy and doing well. The next morning, her father appeared on television with his new daughter. The names of the baby were announced on 26 October, when the birth was registered in The Hague.


Princess Ariane was baptised in the Kloosterkerk, The Hague on 29 October 2007. Vicar Deodaat van der Boon used water from the Jordan River to baptize the princess, who was wearing the christening gown that Princess Wilhelmina first wore in 1880. Over 850 guests were invited to attend, including Princess Máxima's parents and Dutch prime minister Jan Peter Balkenende. Her godparents are Hereditary Grand Duke Guillaume of Luxembourg, Baron Tijo Collot d'Escury, Antoine Frilling, Valerie Delger and Inés Zorreguieta.


Princess Ariane attended the Christelijk Gymnasium Sorghvliet in The Hague. In May 2023, the Dutch Royal Court announced that the Princess will continue her secondary school studies at the UWC Adriatic in Italy. On 24 May 2025 she graduated from UWC Adriatic.


She speaks Dutch, English and Spanish.


Hospitalisation

On 2 May 2007, Princess Ariane was admitted to the Leiden University Medical Center with a suspected lung infection. She was released from the hospital on 5 May 2007 after treatment for her bacterial and viral infection. On 13 June 2007, Prince Willem-Alexander and Princess Máxima released a thank you note "not only for the congratulations upon Ariane's birth but also for the best wishes they received upon her hospitalisation" and released a third official picture with their newborn daughter. The couple reportedly received over 30,000 letters of well-wishers. On 8 October 2009, Princess Ariane was again admitted to a hospital, in which she had to stay for one night, due to a respiratory infection.


Titles, styles and arms

Titles and styles

Ariane's full title and style is "Her Royal Highness Princess Ariane of the Netherlands, Princess of Orange-Nassau.  (Dutch: Hare Koninklijke Hoogheid Ariane Wilhelmina Máxima Inés, Prinses der Nederlanden, Prinses van Oranje-Nassau).


Honours

References

External links

2 also Princess of Lippe-Biesterfeld


