


Princess Marina of Greece and Denmark (Greek: Μαρίνα; 13 December  1906 – 27 August 1968), later Duchess of Kent, was a Greek and Danish princess by birth and a British princess by marriage. A granddaughter of King George I of Greece and Queen Olga, she was the daughter of Prince Nicholas of Greece and Denmark and Grand Duchess Elena Vladimirovna of Russia. In 1934, she married Prince George, Duke of Kent, the fourth son of King George V and Queen Mary. They had three children: Edward, Alexandra, and Michael. She was widowed in 1942, when her husband was killed in a plane crash while on active service, and remained active in royal duties throughout her later life, attending public engagements across the Commonwealth, including the independence celebrations for Ghana and Botswana. She died in 1968, aged 61.


Early life

Marina was born on 13 December 1906 in Athens, Greece, during the reign of her paternal grandfather, George I of Greece. She was the third and youngest daughter of Prince Nicholas of Greece and Denmark and his wife, Grand Duchess Elena Vladimirovna of Russia. Her father was the third son of George I of Greece and Queen Olga, while her mother was the only daughter of Grand Duke Vladimir Alexandrovich and Grand Duchess Maria Pavlovna of Russia. Through her father she was a great-granddaughter of Christian IX of Denmark, and through her mother a granddaughter of Emperor Alexander II of Russia.


Marina had two elder sisters, Princess Olga and Princess Elizabeth. Olga married Prince Paul of Yugoslavia in 1923; following the assassination of his cousin, Alexander I of Yugoslavia, Paul served as Prince Regent of Yugoslavia from 1934 to 1941. Elizabeth married Carl Theodor, Count of Toeering-Jettenbach in 1934. One of their paternal uncles was Prince Andrew of Greece and Denmark, father of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, making Marina and her sisters Philip's first cousins.


Marina spent her early years in Greece and lived with her parents and paternal grandparents at Tatoi Palace. She and her sisters were raised to be devout and religious, a quality encouraged by their grandmother, Queen Olga of Greece. The family travelled outside Greece frequently, especially during the summer months. Marina's first recorded visit to Britain was in 1910, when she was three, following the death of her godfather, Edward VII. During that visit she met her godmother and future mother-in-law, Queen Mary, who treated Marina and her sisters as if they were her own children.


The Greek royal family was forced into exile when Marina was 11, following the overthrow of the monarchy. They later settled in Paris, while Marina spent periods living with her extended family across Europe.


Marriage and children

Wedding ceremony

In 1932, Marina met Prince George (later the Duke of Kent), her second cousin through Christian IX of Denmark, in London. Their betrothal was announced in August 1934, and George was created Duke of Kent on 9 October. They married at Westminster Abbey on 29 November. It was the first major royal wedding since that of Prince Albert, Duke of York (later George VI), and Lady Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon (later Queen Elizabeth the Queen mother) 11 years earlier. The ceremony was the first royal wedding to be broadcast by wireless, using microphones connected to a control room located beneath the Unknown Warrior's tomb. The service was transmitted both within Britain and overseas, and loudspeakers allowed spectators outside the Abbey to hear the proceedings. A Greek Orthodox ceremony followed in the private chapel at Buckingham Palace, which was temporarily converted for the occasion. Marina remains the most recent foreign princess to marry into the British royal family.


Married life

Marina and George established their first home at 3 Belgrave Square, close to Buckingham Palace. Marina became patroness of several organisations and charities, including the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Hospital, the Women's Hospital Fund, and the Central School of Speech and Drama, causes she continued to support throughout her life. She developed a close relationship with her mother-in-law with whom she often spent time while George was undertaking royal duties.


The couple had three children:


George was killed on 25 August 1942 in an air crash at Eagle's Rock, near Dunbeath, Caithness, Scotland, while on active service with the Royal Air Force. According to royal biographer Hugo Vickers, Marina was "the only war widow in Britain whose estate was forced to pay death duties".


During the Second World War, Marina trained as a nurse for three months under the pseudonym "Sister Kay" and joined the Civil Nursing Reserve.


Later life and death

After her husband's death, Marina continued to be an active member of the British royal family, carrying out a wide range of royal and official engagements. She served as president of the Wimbledon All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club for 26 years, and was president of the Royal National Lifeboat Institution from 1943 until her death. In recognition of her contribution, she was awarded the RNLI's gold medal in 1967.


In 1947, Marina visited Greece and Italy. In June 1952, she laid the foundation stone of the new St Mark's Church in Bromley, London, which had been damaged in the war.


Later in 1952, Marina visited Sarawak (then a British Crown Colony), where she laid the foundation stone of the St. Thomas's Cathedral in Kuching. She also visited the Batu Lintang camp, a former Japanese internment camp that had been converted into a teacher training college, and travelled to Sibu, where she opened the outpatient department of the Lau Kheng Howe Hospital.


In 1954, Marina was granted an Apartment at Kensington Palace as a permanent grace-and-favour residence. During her early widowhood she had often stayed with her mother-in-law at Marlborough House; however Mary's death in 1953 created a need for Marina to have her own London residence. The Apartment had stood vacant for nearly 15 years, having previously been the home of Princess Louise, Duchess of Argyll, prior to her death in 1939. As the apartment was considered too large for Marina's needs, its eastern half was divided to create Apartment 1A. The works were budgeted at £80,000 but ultimately cost £127,000. During the renovations, Marina reportedly considered removing an original Wren staircase inside Apartment 1, finding it "too much like a servant's staircase" and too narrow for descending in full evening dress; palace officials intervened to prevent its removal. Marina and her three children took up residence in October 1955, and Apartment 1 remained her home until her death in 1968.


In March 1957, when the Gold Coast achieved independence from Britain as Ghana, Marina was appointed to represent the Queen at the celebrations. 50 years later, at the 50th anniversary of Ghana's independence, her son, Edward, was appointed by the Queen to represent her.


Marina earned a place in the International Best Dressed List Hall of Fame in 1960, together with the Princess of Monaco, Patricia Lopez-Willshaw, and Merle Oberon. In 1964, she undertook an extensive tour of Australia and officially opened Gladesville Bridge in Sydney.


In September and October 1966, when the British Protectorates of Bechuanaland and Basutoland became the Republic of Botswana and the Kingdom of Lesotho respectively, Marina was again appointed to represent the Queen at both independence celebrations. The main public hospital in Gaborone, the new capital of Botswana, is named Princess Marina Hospital. She served as Chancellor of the University of Kent at Canterbury from 1963 until her death.


Marina died at 11:40 am on 27 August 1968 at Kensington Palace from a brain tumour, aged 61. Her funeral service was held at St. George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, on 30 August. She was buried in the Royal Burial Ground, Frogmore. Her funeral was the last royal ceremony attended by her brother-in-law, the former king Edward VIII. Marina's will was sealed in London after her death. Her estate was valued at £76,166 (equivalent to £940,600 in 2022).


Legacy

Marina gave her name to a number of institutions and facilities, including:


References in popular culture

Titles, styles, honours, and arms

Titles and styles

Marina was known as the Princess Marina of Greece. After her marriage she was styled Her Royal Highness The Duchess of Kent, and was later known as Her Royal Highness The Princess Marina, Duchess of Kent.


Honours

Commonwealth


Foreign


Dynastic


Honorary military appointments

Arms

Ancestry

See also

References

Bibliography

External links

