Andrew Albert Christian Edward Mountbatten-Windsor (born 19 February 1960), formerly Prince Andrew, Duke of York, is the third child and second son of Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, and a younger brother of King Charles III. He married Sarah Ferguson in 1986, and was created Duke of York on their wedding day. They had two daughters, Beatrice and Eugenie, before separating in 1992 and divorcing in 1996. He continued to undertake official duties on behalf of Elizabeth II until 2019. In the same year, Elizabeth II removed his military affiliations and patronages, and he ceased using the style "Royal Highness". Early life

During a 45-day tour of Canada in June and July 1959, Queen Elizabeth II discovered that she was pregnant. Andrew was born a prince at 3:30 pm on 19 February 1960 at Buckingham Palace, the third child and second son of Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh. Andrew was the first child born to a reigning British monarch since Princess Beatrice, the youngest daughter of Queen Victoria, in 1857. At the end of the war, Invincible returned to Portsmouth, where Elizabeth and Philip joined other families of the crew in welcoming the vessel home. On 1 February 1984, he was promoted to lieutenant, after which Elizabeth appointed him her personal aide-de-camp. He later served on HMS Edinburgh as officer of the watch and Assistant Navigating Officer until 1989, including a six-month deployment to the Far East as part of exercise Outback 88. On the same day, Elizabeth created him Duke of York, Earl of Inverness and Baron Killyleagh; the first two of these titles had previously been held by both his maternal grandfather, George VI, and his great-grandfather George V. The couple initially appeared to have a happy marriage and had two daughters, Princess Beatrice (born 1988) and Princess Eugenie (born 1990), presenting a united public image during the late 1980s. Andrew's frequent travel due to his naval career, combined with relentless and often critical media attention on the Duchess of York, contributed to strains in the marriage. In March 2023, it was reported that Andrew had been offered Frogmore Cottage after his nephew Prince Harry was asked to vacate the residence. In March 2019, Andrew took over the patronage of the Outward Bound Trust from his father, the Duke of Edinburgh, serving until his own resignation in November 2019. Andrew founded the Prince Andrew Charitable Trust which aimed to support young people in different areas such as education and training. He also established several awards, including the Inspiring Digital Enterprise Award (iDEA), a programme designed to develop digital and enterprise skills, the Duke of York Award for Technical Education, presented to talented young people in technical fields, and the Duke of York Young Entrepreneur Award, which recognised young entrepreneurial talent. Andrew was additionally involved with the private limited company the Duke of York's Community Initiative (known as the Yorkshire Foundation between 2005 and 2011) and with a separate charity of a similar name, both of which supported voluntary organisations in Yorkshire. The post, previously held by Prince Edward, Duke of Kent, involved representing and promoting the UK at trade fairs and conferences around the world. On 8 March 2011, The Daily Telegraph reported: "In 2010, the Prince spent £620,000 as a trade envoy, including £154,000 on hotels, food and hospitality and £465,000 on travel." In 2026, an anonymous former civil servant alleged that while trade envoy, Andrew used taxpayer money for "massage services". There was never any impropriety on the part of The Duke of York". Libby Purves wrote in The Times in January 2015: "Prince Andrew dazzles easily when confronted with immense wealth and apparent power. Our concerns are not just Prince Andrew, it's the whole UKTI set up. We are concerned that Prince Andrew is used to sell arms, and where you sell arms it is likely to be to despotic regimes. Andrew Smith, a spokesman for CAAT, said: "We are calling on Prince Andrew and the UK government to stop selling arms to Bahrain. By endorsing the Bahraini dictatorship Prince Andrew is giving his implicit support to their oppressive practices. Finances

Andrew received a £249,000 annuity from Queen Elizabeth II, which was reduced by King Charles III in April 2023. The Sunday Times reported in July 2008 that, for "the Duke of York's public role ... Bloom and Evers were driven into the Palace in Andrew's car from their Knightsbridge hotel and later attended his Pitch@Palace event at St James's Palace before dining that evening with Andrew, Ferguson, and their daughter Beatrice. Ferguson first met Bloom in Las Vegas in 2018, and he and Evers visited London frequently in 2019, meeting the York family on several occasions. The Telegraph reported that the payment had been described to the bankers "as a wedding gift" for his elder daughter, Beatrice, though court documents did not suggest that Beatrice was aware of the transaction. Kaituni, for whom Andrew had allegedly lobbied a British company, had reportedly given Beatrice an £18,000 gold and diamond necklace for her 21st birthday in 2009 and was invited to Eugenie's wedding in 2018. In December 2010, Andrew was photographed walking with Epstein in Central Park during a visit to New York City. In 2011, Virginia Giuffre, a prominent accuser of Epstein, told the Daily Mail that she had never had sexual contact with the then-Prince Andrew, but she later alleged that Epstein trafficked her to Andrew on several occasions. Giuffre stated that she had sex with Andrew on three occasions, including during a trip to London in 2001 when she was 17, and later in New York and on Little Saint James in the US Virgin Islands during an orgy. An email sent by "G Maxwell" to Epstein in 2015, released as part of the Epstein files, appears to confirm that a photograph had been taken, stating: "In 2001 I was in London when  met a number of friends of mine including Prince Andrew. In the interview, Andrew denied having sex with Giuffre on 10 March 2001, as she alleged, saying he had been at home with his daughters after attending a party at a PizzaExpress branch in Woking with his elder daughter, Beatrice. It was described as a "car crash", "nuclear explosion level bad", and the worst public-relations crisis for the royal family since the death of Diana, Princess of Wales. Lawsuit

In August 2021, Giuffre sued Andrew in the federal District Court for the Southern District of New York, accusing him of "sexual assault and intentional infliction of emotional distress". The scrutiny of Andrew's relationship with Epstein also led to scrutiny of other public figures' ties to Epstein, notably the relationship of Mette-Marit, Crown Princess of Norway, and Epstein. In June 2022, Rachael Maskell, Labour MP for York Central, introduced a 'Removal of Titles' private members bill in the House of Commons, which would have enabled the monarch or a parliamentary committee to strip aristocratic titles from individuals deemed unworthy. In March 2022, Andrew made his first public appearance in months, helping the Queen walk into Westminster Abbey for a memorial service for his father, the Duke of Edinburgh. Following the death of Queen Elizabeth II on 8 September 2022, Andrew appeared in civilian clothing at various ceremonial events. Commemorative plaques bearing his name were removed from several locations in the Falkland Islands, and Mid and East Antrim Council agreed to rename Prince Andrew Way in Carrickfergus. It was the first arrest of a senior member of the British royal family since that of King Charles I in 1647, and the first arrest of a sibling of the reigning monarch since that of Elizabeth I in 1554. Page later alleged in the documentary Prince Andrew: Banished that different women visited Andrew daily, and that when one was denied entry by security, Andrew allegedly called an officer a "fat, lardy cunt" over the phone. Briggs said she had been reduced to tears after being reprimanded for not properly closing the heavy curtains in his office, adding that his behaviour contrasted with that of his brothers Charles and Edward, who "weren't anything like him" and his father Philip, whom she described as "so nice and gentlemanly". In 2025, Andrew Lownie alleged in his book Entitled: The Rise and Fall of the House of York that Andrew reprimanded a palace employee for not using the proper name and title when referring to his grandmother Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother, calling him a "fucking imbecile". Biographer Robert Hardman alleged in Elizabeth II: In Private. The Inside Story that Andrew had struck the Master of the Household, Tony Johnstone-Burt, during a dispute over room availability for one of Andrew's events, and that the incident led to Prince Philip sending Johnstone‑Burt a letter of apology. Titles, styles, honours and arms

Titles and styles


As a son of the reigning monarch, he was styled at birth as "His Royal Highness The Prince Andrew". On 23 July 1986, the day of his wedding, he was created Duke of York, Earl of Inverness, and Baron Killyleagh, and assumed the style "His Royal Highness The Duke of York". In 2019, in light of Andrew's friendship with the convicted sex offender Epstein, residents of Inverness began a campaign to strip him of his earldom, saying that "it is inappropriate that Prince Andrew is associated with our beautiful city". Rachael Maskell, the Labour Co-op MP for York Central, said she would seek ways to make Andrew give up his dukedom if he did not do so voluntarily; the City of York Council removed his honorary freedom of the city by a unanimous vote, and several York councillors called for him to lose the title Duke of York. He is to use the surname "Mountbatten-Windsor", in accordance with the 1960 Privy Council declaration on the family surname by Queen Elizabeth II. Naval ranks

Honours

Commonwealth

Foreign

Appointments

Freedom of the City

Former honorary military appointments

In 2019, Andrew's military affiliations were suspended and on 13 January 2022 they were formally returned to Queen Elizabeth II. Canada


 New Zealand


 United Kingdom


Arms

Depictions

Andrew was portrayed by Rufus Sewell in the 2024 Netflix drama film Scoop, which depicts the 2019 BBC Newsnight interview "Prince Andrew & the Epstein Scandal".