Anne, Princess Royal (Anne Elizabeth Alice Louise; born 15 August 1950), is a member of the British royal family. She is the second child and only daughter of Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, and the sister of King Charles III. She has held the title of Princess Royal since 1987. In 1973, Anne married Captain Mark Phillips; the couple separated in 1989 and divorced in 1992. They have two children, Peter Phillips and Zara Tindall. In 1992, she married Commander (now Vice Admiral) Sir Timothy Laurence, whom she met during his service as an equerry to Queen Elizabeth II. She was the second child and only daughter of Princess Elizabeth, Duchess of Edinburgh (later Queen Elizabeth II), and Philip, Duke of Edinburgh. In May 1959, a Girl Guides unit, the 1st Buckingham Palace Guide Company, incorporating the  Holy Trinity Brompton Brownie pack, was re-formed specifically so that Anne, like her mother and her aunt Princess Margaret before her, could socialise with girls her own age. Marriages and children

Marriage to Mark Phillips

Anne met Mark Phillips, a lieutenant in the 1st Queen's Dragoon Guards, in 1968 at a party for horse enthusiasts. Media reports stated that Phillips was offered an earldom, as was then customary for untitled men marrying into the royal family, but he and Anne declined the honour. The couple had two children: Peter (born 1977) and Zara Phillips (born 1981). Anne and Phillips have five grandchildren. On 31 August 1989, Anne and Phillips announced their intention to separate; the couple had been rarely seen together in public, and both had been romantically linked with other people. Kidnapping attempt

On 20 March 1974, Anne and Mark Phillips were returning to Buckingham Palace when a car forced their Rolls-Royce to stop on Pall Mall. Detective Constable Peter Edmonds responded, pursued Ball, and arrested him. The attempted kidnapping is the subject of the Granada Television docudrama To Kidnap a Princess (2006) and inspired storylines in Tom Clancy's novel Patriot Games. On 12 September 2022, at St Giles' Cathedral in Edinburgh, Anne became the first woman to participate in a Vigil of the Princes, standing guard by her mother's coffin. On 21 April 2026, Anne opened the Queen Elizabeth II Garden on the centenary of her mother's birth. She founded The Princess Royal Trust for Carers in 1991. As of 2022, the Royal Society has four Royal Fellows: Anne; William, Prince of Wales; Edward, Duke of Kent; and King Charles. Anne was elected Chancellor of the University of Edinburgh with effect from 31 March 2011, succeeding her father, who stepped down in 2010. In 2023, she succeeded the Duke of Kent as president of the Commonwealth War Graves Commission. She is also patron of the Royal College of Occupational Therapists, the Special Forces Club, Royal College of Midwives, Royal College of Emergency Medicine, Magpas Air Ambulance, Edinburgh University's Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies, Royal Holloway, University of London, International Students House, London, Acid Survivors Trust International, Townswomen's Guilds, Citizens Advice, the Royal Edinburgh Military Tattoo, the Scottish Rugby Union, and the Royal Society of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce. In 2025, she was announced as patron of Friends of the Elderly, taking on the role previously held by Queen Elizabeth II for more than 60 years. British Vogue editor Edward Enninful has said that "Princess Anne is a true style icon and was all about sustainable fashion before the rest of us really knew what that meant". She is known for recycling outfits, including a floral-print dress worn both to the wedding of the Prince of Wales in 1981 and the wedding of Lady Rose Windsor in 2008. She presented the Queen Elizabeth II award for British design at London Fashion Week in 2020. Anne has appeared on three British Vogue covers: the September 1971 issue at age 21, and the May and November 1973 issues marking her engagement to Mark Phillips. Titles, styles, honours and arms

Titles and styles

Anne is the seventh Princess Royal, an appellation granted only to the eldest daughter of the Sovereign. The previous holder was Princess Mary, Countess of Harewood, the daughter of King George V and Anne's great-aunt. She is a recipient of the Royal Family Order of Elizabeth II, the Royal Family Order of Charles III, and serves as a Personal Aide-de-Camp to the Sovereign.