Ashley Louis David Hicks (born 18 July 1963) is a British interior designer, author, photographer and artist. He is the only son of Lady Pamela Hicks (née Mountbatten) and David Nightingale Hicks. Hicks has designed interiors in Europe, the United States, and the United Kingdom. Hicks is the grandson of Louis Mountbatten, 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma. Early life and family

Ashley Louis David Hicks was born on 18 July 1963, at King's College Hospital in Denmark Hill, London. He is the son and second child of David and Lady Pamela Hicks. He is the younger brother of Edwina Brudenell and the older brother of India Hicks, author, television host, fashion model, and founder of her eponymous lifestyle brand. Hicks was raised at Britwell House, an 18th-century house in Britwell Salome in Oxfordshire, that served as the family's home, as well as his father's showplace. Hicks was a boarding student at Stowe School. In 1978, the family decided to sell the house, and Hicks attended the three-day Sotheby's sale, 20–22 March 1979. After the auction, the Hicks family moved to The Grove, a nearby estate, and also resided at Albany, an historic and exclusive apartment house in Piccadilly. Through his mother, Hicks is a grandson of the first Earl and Countess Mountbatten of Burma. Through his maternal grandfather, Lord Louis Mountbatten, Hicks is a second cousin of King Charles III. Lady Edwina Mountbatten was one of Britain's richest women, having inherited most of the £7.5 million fortune of her grandfather, Sir Ernest Cassel. Family tragedy

As a child, Hicks spent family holidays at Sligo Castle in Ireland and the Mountbatten family ancestral home at Broadlands in Hampshire, where the royal family were frequent guests. In August 1979, when Hicks was 16 years old, his grandfather and his cousin Nicholas Knatchbull were assassinated by the Provisional Irish Republican Army when his grandfather's wooden boat, the Shadow V, was blown up by a remote-controlled bomb on Donegal Bay. We had the windows open and then we heard this big bang."


Career

Hicks says his first decorating experience took place when he was 15 or 16 years old, when he decorated his room in a checkered black-and-white motif. Influenced by his father, Hicks studied painting and fine art, graduating from the Bath School of Art and Design and trained with the Architectural Association School of Architecture, in London. In 1997, Hicks began designing furniture at the Gem Palace in Jaipur, India. When Hicks initially designed in India, he designed under the moniker of "Jantar Mantar". Hicks explains, "It means abracadabra, also hocus pocus, and is local slang for the Jaipur Observatory."


In addition to interior and furniture design, Hicks produces various lines of fabric, wallpaper, and carpeting—some under the "David Hicks by Ashley Hicks" brand and others under his own name. Hicks also produced a series of Allegra Hicks shops as well as a collection of home accessories that were sold in these shops. In 2017, Hicks published his first book on his own work, Details, which also serves as a source book for his inspiration; published by IDEA Publishing, it sold out within a month. Hicks began photographing historic interiors for Cabana Magazine in 2016, ranging from a derelict glass factory in Murano, Venice, to grand English country houses like Houghton and Althorp. Hicks is currently a contributing editor for Cabana Magazine. Hicks exhibited furniture and sculptural objects made by his own hands at New York's R and Company gallery in 2019,


Hicks has also regularly worked with various brands on product collaborations, including a bed linen collection with Frette, a candle range collaboration with Jo Malone and swimsuit collaborations with Orlebar Brown and Coverswim, as well as furniture projects with Kartell and Promemoria. Personal life

On 18 October 1990, Hicks married Italian designer, Marina Allegra Federica Silvia Tondato (born Turin, Italy, 20 May 1960), a daughter of physicist and musician Dr. From his first marriage, Hicks has two daughters:


After their wedding, Hicks and his wife lived in a renovated building in New York City that belonged to Marc Chagall's grandson. On 5 September 2015, Hicks married Kathryn 'Katalina' Sharkey also known as Kata Sharkey de Solis (born Houston, Texas, U.S., 31 December 1981, daughter of William T. Hicks and Sharkey separated in August 2018 and then divorced. From his second marriage, Hicks has two sons:


Hicks decorated his partner Martina Mondadori's home in Milan, Italy, in 2020.