Edward VIII (Edward Albert Christian George Andrew Patrick David; 23 June 1894 – 28 May 1972), later known as the Duke of Windsor, was King of the United Kingdom and the British Dominions, and Emperor of India, from 20 January 1936 until his abdication in December of the same year. Edward was born during the reign of his great-grandmother Queen Victoria as the eldest child of the Duke and Duchess of York, later King George V and Queen Mary. He was succeeded by his younger brother, George VI. He was the eldest son of the Duke and Duchess of York (later King George V and Queen Mary). His father was the son of the Prince and Princess of Wales (later King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra) and his mother was the eldest daughter of Princess Mary Adelaide of Cambridge and Francis, Duke of Teck. Edward was baptised Edward Albert Christian George Andrew Patrick David in the Green Drawing Room of White Lodge on 16 July by Edward White Benson, Archbishop of Canterbury. The name Edward was chosen in honour of Edward's late uncle Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale, who was known within the family as "Eddy" (Edward being among his given names); Albert was included at the behest of Queen Victoria for her late husband Albert, Prince Consort; Christian was in honour of his great-grandfather King Christian IX of Denmark; and the last four names – George, Andrew, Patrick and David – came from, respectively, the patron saints of England, Scotland, Ireland and Wales. Upon the death of Edward VII, Edward's father ascended the throne as George V, and Edward himself became heir apparent. The investiture took place in Wales at the instigation of the Welsh politician David Lloyd George, Constable of the Castle and Chancellor of the Exchequer in the Liberal government. Lloyd George devised a rather fanciful ceremony in the style of a Welsh pageant and coached Edward to speak a few words in Welsh. From January to April 1931, the Prince of Wales and his brother Prince George travelled 18,000 miles (29,000 km) on a tour of South America, steaming out on the ocean liner Oropesa, and returning via Paris and an Imperial Airways flight from Paris–Le Bourget Airport that landed specially in Windsor Great Park. Edward's womanising and reckless behaviour during the 1920s and 1930s worried Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin, King George V, and those close to the prince. "After I am dead," George said, "the boy will ruin himself in twelve months."


George V favoured his second son Albert ("Bertie") and Albert's daughter Elizabeth ("Lilibet"), later King George VI and Queen Elizabeth II respectively. The magazine asked whether "she did not sometimes wonder how much truth there is in the story that he once said he would renounce his rights upon the death of George V – which would make her nickname come true". Reign

George V died on 20 January 1936, and Edward ascended the throne as Edward VIII. When George VI succeeded to the throne, he also faced left to maintain the tradition by suggesting that, had any further coins been minted featuring Edward's portrait, they would have shown him facing right. On 16 July 1936, George Andrew McMahon produced a loaded revolver as Edward rode on horseback at Constitution Hill, near Buckingham Palace. Edward duly signed the instruments of abdication at Fort Belvedere on 10 December 1936 in the presence of his younger brothers: Prince Albert, Duke of York, next in line for the throne; Prince Henry, Duke of Gloucester; and Prince George, Duke of Kent. The Duke of York succeeded to the throne as George VI. Accordingly, George VI's elder daughter, Princess Elizabeth, became heir presumptive. Duke of Windsor

On 12 December 1936, at the accession meeting of the British Privy Council, George VI announced his intention to make his brother the "Duke of Windsor" with the style of Royal Highness. George's decision to create Edward a royal duke ensured that he could neither stand for election to the British House of Commons nor speak on political subjects in the House of Lords. George VI forbade members of the royal family to attend, to the enduring resentment of the Duke and Duchess of Windsor. The Government declined to include the Duke or Duchess on the Civil List, and the Duke's allowance was paid personally by George VI. George also purchased Sandringham House and Balmoral Castle from Edward; both were Edward's personal property, inherited from his father, and thus did not automatically pass to George VI on his accession. In the early days of George VI's reign, Edward telephoned daily, importuning for money and urging that Wallis be granted the style of Royal Highness, until the harassed king ordered that the calls not be put through. King George VI (with the support of Queen Mary and his wife Queen Elizabeth) threatened to cut off Edward's allowance if he returned to Britain without an invitation. Edward became embittered toward his mother, Queen Mary, writing to her in 1939: " destroy the last vestige of feeling I had left for you ... The former Austrian ambassador Count Albert von Mensdorff-Pouilly-Dietrichstein, who was also a second cousin once removed and friend of George V, believed that Edward favoured German fascism as a bulwark against communism, and even that he initially favoured an alliance with Germany. What is certain is that George VI sent the Royal Librarian, Owen Morshead, accompanied by Blunt – then working part-time in the Royal Library as well as for British intelligence – to Friedrichshof in March 1945 to secure papers relating to Victoria, German Empress, the eldest child of Queen Victoria. The health of George VI was failing and de Courcy was concerned about the influence of the Mountbatten family over the young Princess Elizabeth. Burger, Charles Lindbergh, Alice Roosevelt Longworth, Arnold Palmer, George H. Queen Mary refused to receive her formally. Edward, however, sometimes met his mother and his brother, George VI; he attended George's funeral in 1952. Mary remained angry with Edward and indignant over his marriage to Wallis: "To give up all this for that", she said. They were visited by his niece Elizabeth II, his sister-in-law Princess Marina, Duchess of Kent, and his sister Mary, Princess Royal and Countess of Harewood. In 1967, the Duke and Duchess joined the royal family for the centenary of Queen Mary's birth. His body was returned to Britain, lying in state at St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle.