King Juan Carlos IQueen Sofía


The Duchess of Soria and HernaniThe Duke of Soria and Hernani


The Dowager Duchess of Calabria


Felipe VI (.mw-parser-output .IPA-label-small{font-size:85%}.mw-parser-output .references .IPA-label-small,.mw-parser-output .infobox .IPA-label-small,.mw-parser-output .navbox .IPA-label-small{font-size:100%}Spanish: ; Felipe Juan Pablo Alfonso de Todos los Santos de Borbón y Grecia; born 30 January 1968) is King of Spain, having reigned since 19 June 2014. Felipe was born in Madrid during the dictatorship of Francisco Franco as the third child and only son of Prince Juan Carlos of Spain and Princess Sophia of Greece and Denmark (later King and Queen of Spain). He was officially proclaimed Prince of Asturias in 1977, two years after his father became king, and was formally sworn in as heir in 1986. They have two daughters: Leonor and Sofía. Early life and family

Felipe was born at 12:45 (CET) on 30 January 1968 at Our Lady of Loreto Hospital in Madrid, as the third child and only son of Prince Juan Carlos of Spain (later King Juan Carlos I) and Princess Sophia of Greece and Denmark (later Queen Sofía of Spain). His full baptismal name, Felipe Juan Pablo Alfonso de Todos los Santos, was given in honor of significant relatives and ancestors: the first Bourbon king of Spain, Felipe V; his grandfathers, Infante Juan, Count of Barcelona and King Paul of Greece; his great-grandfather, Alfonso XIII of Spain; and the customary Bourbons addition de Todos los Santos ("of all the Saints"). His godparents were his paternal grandfather, the Count of Barcelona, and his paternal great-grandmother, Queen Victoria Eugenie. The dictator Francisco Franco died just over two months before Felipe's eighth birthday, after which Felipe's father ascended the throne, having been appointed Prince of Spain in 1969. Prince of Asturias

In 1977, Felipe was formally proclaimed Prince of Asturias. On 1 November the same year, he was ceremonially paid homage as Prince of Asturias in Covadonga. In January 1987, he continued his naval training on board the training ship Juan Sebastián Elcano. Both his mother and uncle, King Constantine II of Greece, were on the Greek sailing team at the 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome (his mother as a substitute), and Felipe's father and sister were also Olympic sailors for Spain. Although there were some engagement rumors in the previous weeks, on 31 October 2003, a TV program called Con T de Tarde announced unexpectedly that the Prince of Asturias was dating Letizia Ortiz Rocasolano, a television journalist who had been married previously. In Spain alone, the royal wedding was watched by more than 25 million viewers, the most watched television event in the history of Spanish television. Felipe and Letizia have two daughters: Leonor, Princess of Asturias (born 31 October 2005) and Infanta Sofía (born 29 April 2007). Activities in Spain and abroad

Felipe undertook his constitutional duties as heir to the throne, hosting many official events in Spain and participating in all events of different sectors and aspects of Spanish public life. On occasions when King Juan Carlos I was unable to attend, Felipe presided over the annual presentation of dispatches to officers and non-commissioned officers in the Armed Forces as well as participating in military exercises held by the three Armed Services. Since January 1996, Felipe has represented Spain at many Latin American presidents' inauguration ceremonies. Felipe has also played an active role in promoting Spain's economic, commercial and cultural interests and the Spanish language abroad. He frequently represents Spain at world economic and trade events (e.g. Expotecnia, Expoconsumo, and Expohabitat), and is especially interested in promoting the creation of Centres and University Chairs to advance the study of Spain both historically and in the present-day at major foreign universities. Most noteworthy is the Prince of Asturias Foundation, where he presides annually at the international awards ceremony of the highly prestigious Princess of Asturias Awards (formerly the Prince of Asturias Awards). Felipe is a member of the Sons of the American Revolution due to his patriot ancestor Charles III of Spain. Reign

Accession

On 2 June 2014, King Juan Carlos announced his intent to abdicate in Felipe's favor. As required by the Constitution of Spain, the Council of Ministers began deliberations the following day on an organic law to give effect to the abdication. Two days later, he also appointed José Manuel de Zuleta y Alejandro, 14th duke of Abrantes, as Private Secretary to the Queen. The visit followed one by King Juan Carlos I and Queen Sofía on 28 April. In February 2015, Felipe announced he would cut his annual salary by 20% as a result of the economic recession and hardships continuing to hamper Spain. In June 2015, Felipe VI stripped his sister, Infanta Cristina, of her royal title of Duchess of Palma de Mallorca, after the tax fraud allegations surrounding her and her husband, Iñaki Urdangarín. Likewise, in April 2024 the king appointed a new private secretary to the Queen, State lawyer María Dolores Ocaña Madrid, replacing the duke of Abrantes. 2020 royal finances controversy

On 15 March 2020, following the revelation in The Daily Telegraph that Felipe VI appeared as second beneficiary (after his father) of the Lucum Foundation, the entity on the receiving end of a €65 million donation by Abdullah bin Abdulaziz, King of Saudi Arabia, the Royal Household issued a statement declaring (a) that Felipe VI would renounce any inheritance from his father to which he could be entitled, and (b) that Juan Carlos would lose his public stipend from the part of the General State Budget dedicated to the Royal Household. This amount makes him one of the least wealthy monarchs in the world, despite previous estimates of his father Juan Carlos I's wealth being estimated between $2–2.3 billion. He also warned the referendum could put the economy of the entire north-east region of Spain at risk. Party officials from the PP, PSOE and Ciudadanos applauded the King's "commitment to legality" and the "defense of the Constitution, the  Statute, the rule of law and the territorial integrity of Spain", whereas leaders from Unidos Podemos and Catalunya en Comú criticized it "as unworthy as it was irresponsible", paving the way for a harsh intervention of the Catalan autonomy. COVID-19 pandemic

On 18 March 2020, a widespread cacerolada from the balconies of some cities across Spain took place, in an attempt to counter-program the TV discourse of Felipe VI on the COVID-19 pandemic in the country. The intent was to force Juan Carlos I to donate to public healthcare the €100M he had allegedly obtained through kickbacks from Saudi Arabia, which was ultimately dismissed. Despite the attempt to boycott the speech, it was seen by more than 15 million citizens, making it the most watched speech by a monarch in the history of Spain. While he was isolated, Queen Letizia replaced him in those events for which she was constitutionally authorized (awards delivery, lunches, event openings, etc.) but not in those activities tightly related to constitutional responsibilities (such as the working meeting with the president of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Željko Komšić, in 2022, which had to be postponed). Duke of Franco

The daughter of Francisco Franco, Carmen Franco, was created Duchess of Franco by King Juan Carlos in 1975. In 2018, the Izquierda Unida party sent a letter to Felipe VI asking that the title be repressed as a violation of Spain's Historical Memory Law, as the power to make or unmake nobility resides solely in the Spanish monarch and is not covered by that law. On 3 November 2024, King Felipe, Queen Letizia, Prime Minister Sánchez and Valencian president Carlos Mazón were violently confronted during a meeting with victims of the October 2024 Spain floods in Paiporta in the Valencian Community, who threw mud and objects at them and injured two bodyguards. Before the start of lunch, the Princess of Asturias and Infanta Sofía surprised the king with an improvised speech to congratulate him on the anniversary. Jaime Alfonsín, former secretary of the king was created Marquess of Alfonsín and Grandee of Spain, while former tennis player Rafael Nadal was created Marquess of Llevant de Mallorca, swimmer Teresa Perales was created Marchioness of Perales, singer Luz Casal was created Marchioness of Luz y Paz, biochemist Carlos López Otín was created Marquess of Castillo de Leres and photographer Cristina García Rodero was created Marchioness of Valle de Alcudia. As King of Spain, most of the sports have a tournament in his honor, Copa del Rey (English: King's Cup), which he normally attends and delivers the trophy to the winner. If he cannot attend, it is common for him to be replaced by a member of the royal family, such as Leonor, Princess of Asturias and Infanta Sofía in the UEFA Women's Euro 2022 or Queen Letizia in the 2023 FIFA Women's World Cup final. 2017 terrorist attacks

On the afternoon of 17 August 2017, 22-year-old Younes Abouyaaqoub drove a van into pedestrians on La Rambla street in Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, killing 13 people and injuring at least 130 others, one of whom died 10 days later on 27 August. The Prime Minister of Spain, Mariano Rajoy, called the attack in Barcelona a jihadist attack. The attacks were the deadliest in Spain since the March 2004 Madrid train bombings and the deadliest in Barcelona since the 1987 Hipercor bombing. The King and Queen also left a wreath in the name of the Crown. Some people booed the King of Spain and displayed signs blaming the Head of State for the Spanish arms sales. He has never visited an Oceanian country as a king; as prince of Asturias, he visited Australia and New Zealand in 1990. As King of Spain, he represents Spain in all the Ibero-American Summits, normally calling for the "unity" of the region and the strengthening of relations with Spain and the European Union. In this sense, Spain is also the main contributor to the Ibero-American General Secretariat, headquartered in Madrid. This organization is mainly financed by Spain, with more than 60 per cent of the budget as of 2016. Also, as he did as prince of Asturias, Felipe has kept the tradition of attending the inauguration of Latin American leaders. Portugal

During the reign of Felipe VI, good relations between Spain and Portugal have continued. There, he met with President Aníbal Cavaco Silva and Prime Minister Pedro Passos Coelho, and stated that the relationship between the two countries was "not only the relationship of good neighbors, but of brother countries" and remembered that his grandfather, Infante Juan, Count of Barcelona, chose Portugal to live while in exile. After the election of Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa as new president of Portugal, he made his first official visit to a foreign country to Spain in March 2016. Examples of this relationship are the support that the Portuguese president gave to the king when the monarch was awarded with the World Peace & Liberty Award from the World Association of Jurists in 2018, the private visit that Rebelo de Sousa made to Spain in 2020 to visit the Prado Museum, and having a private lunch with the monarch at Zarzuela Palace, and when they were seen eating on a public terrace near the Royal Palace of Madrid in 2021. Also, Rebelo de Sousa welcomed Leonor, Princess of Asturias in Lisbon during her first international trip and also to Infanta Sofía when she moved to the Portuguese capital to study. Rebelo de Sousa made his last international trip as president to Spain on 20 February 2026. This was the fifth royal visit to the island after Infanta Eulalia, Duchess of Galliera in 1893, Infante Alfonso, Count of Covadonga in 1937, Infante Juan, Count of Barcelona in 1948 and King Juan Carlos in 1999. López Obrador was inaugurated as Mexican president in December 2018, an inauguration attended by the King, and from the beginning, the Mexican president expressed disapproval for what Spain and its companies represented. At the beginning of 2019, the Mexican president asked Felipe VI for an apology on behalf of the Crown and Spain for the events that occurred during the Spanish conquest of the Americas. After this incident, neither the Royal Family nor the King's Household have spoken about the issue or intervened in any way in the relations between Spain and Mexico, leaving it in the hands of the Government. Gibraltar

As King of Spain, Felipe has defended the historic claim of Spain over Gibraltar. Two years later, in another speech at the UN General Assembly podium, the king referred to Gibraltar as the "only existing colony in European territory" and he invited the UK to "put an end to this anachronism with a agreed solution between our two countries that restores the territorial integrity of Spain and is beneficial for the population of the colony and Campo de Gibraltar". State trip to the UK

From 12 to 14 July 2017, the King and Queen of Spain made a state visit to the United Kingdom, which had been postponed twice: the first in March 2016, due to the political crisis in Spain and the second in May 2017, due to the snap general election in Britain. On Wednesday morning the 12th, Charles, Prince of Wales, and Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall, came to receive the King and Queen. From there, they proceeded to Horse Guards Parade, where they were officially received by Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, with military honours and ordnance salutes. In the evening, the State Dinner, hosted by Queen Elizabeth and Prince Philip in honor of the King and Queen of Spain, took place in the Gala Hall of Buckingham Palace. Thursday's day was completed with a gala dinner offered by the Mayor of London in honor of the King and Queen, at Guildhall. To conclude, they held a meeting at Exeter College with representatives of the university's academic community, including professors, postgraduate students and doctoral students linked to Spain. In 1990, he awarded the Sephardic Jewish communities with the Prince of Asturias Award. In December 2015, the King hosted a solemn ceremony in the Royal Palace to celebrate the approval by the Cortes Generales and the subsequent sanction by the Sovereign of the law that granted Spanish nationality to the Sephardic Jews expelled from Spain in 1492 due to the Alhambra Decree. In his speech, he stated that "there is no room for indifference in the face of racism, xenophobia, hatred and antisemitism" and that "forgetting the Holocaust would be extremely dangerous and an utter disrespect to the memory of the victims."


On 9 October 2023, King Felipe condemned "with all firmness" the Hamas-led attack on Israel, called for "doing everything possible to avoid greater suffering, destruction, hopelessness and the loss of more human lives" and affirmed that Spain "remains faithful to its commitment to peace and stability in the region". Later that month, during the 2023 Princess of Asturias Awards ceremony, Felipe referred to the ongoing conflict asking for unity to resolve it and recalled that in 1994, Israeli prime minister Yitzhak Rabin and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat received the Prince of Asturias Award for International Cooperation for their "effort to create conditions of peace in the region" after the Madrid Conference of 1991 and the 1994 Oslo I Accord. On 11 January 2024, the King, in a meeting with the diplomatic corps in Spain, called for the release of war hostages and defended the "establishment of the Palestinian State next to Israel" to stop the "cycle of violence". Titles, styles and arms

Titles and styles

Juan Carlos became King in late November 1975, but no title was conferred on Felipe as heir apparent until 1977, when he was made Prince of Asturias, the traditional title normally held by the heir to the Spanish throne.