Queen Margrethe II


Frederik X (Frederik André Henrik Christian, .mw-parser-output .IPA-label-small{font-size:85%}.mw-parser-output .references .IPA-label-small,.mw-parser-output .infobox .IPA-label-small,.mw-parser-output .navbox .IPA-label-small{font-size:100%}pronounced ; born 26 May 1968) is King of Denmark, reigning since the abdication of his mother, Margrethe II, in January 2024. Frederik is the elder son of Queen Margrethe II and Prince Henrik. He was born during the reign of his maternal grandfather, King Frederik IX, and became Crown Prince of Denmark following his mother's accession in 1972. They married on 14 May 2004 at Copenhagen Cathedral and have four children: Christian, Isabella, Vincent, and Josephine. Early life and education

Frederik was born at 23:50 on 26 May 1968 by emergency caesarean section at Rigshospitalet, the Copenhagen University Hospital in Copenhagen, to the then Princess Margrethe (later Queen Margrethe II), oldest daughter of King Frederik IX and heir presumptive to the Danish throne, and Prince Henrik. At the time of his birth, his maternal grandfather was on the throne of Denmark, his maternal uncle-by-marriage Constantine II was king of Greece and his matrilineal great-grandfather, Gustaf VI Adolf, was on the throne of Sweden. He became Crown Prince of Denmark when his mother ascended the throne on 14 January 1972. Frederik's only sibling is Prince Joachim of Denmark. Frederik remained active in the defence services, and in the period 2002–2003 served as a staff officer at Defence Command Denmark, and from 2003 as a senior lecturer with the Institute of Strategy at the Royal Danish Defence College. Marriage and children

During a Council of State on 8 October 2003, Queen Margrethe gave her consent to the marriage of Crown Prince Frederik to Mary Elizabeth Donaldson, an Australian marketing consultant whom the prince had met while attending the Sydney Olympics in 2000. The couple have four children: Christian (born 15 October 2005), Isabella (born 21 April 2007), and twins Vincent and Josephine (born 8 January 2011). Reign

Queen Margrethe II announced her abdication during her annual live broadcast New Year's Eve address on 31 December 2023. Frederik succeeded her as King of Denmark on 14 January 2024, after Margrethe formally signed an instrument of abdication during a meeting of the Council of State. His motto is Forbundne, forpligtet, for Kongeriget Danmark (English: "United, committed, for the Kingdom of Denmark"), the first motto that does not mention God since Frederik VII. Danish monarchs traditionally travel first to another Scandinavian country, but Frederik had planned the trip prior to Margrethe's abdication. In June, they toured Greenland, one of the autonomous territories of the Kingdom of Denmark. In November 2024 the Royal Court announced that the King had decided to phase out the system of granting companies royal warrants, which has been extant in Denmark since the 19th century. In January 2025, when U.S president elect Donald Trump renewed talks about the intended U.S purchase of Greenland, the King made a speech promoting unity and collaboration within the Kingdom of Denmark. The prince has represented Denmark as a promoter of sustainable Danish energy. At the 2003 Dragon European Championship, where 51 boats participated, the Prince and his crew had been leading after four out of six races; they finished in fourth place. Helming the Swan 60 yacht Emma, he won its IRC category in the 2010 Fyn Cup in Denmark, and was fourth in the 2011 Danish Dragon Championship with Nanoq. In 2016, he completed the 54 kilometres (34 mi) Norwegian Birkebeinerrennet with Norway's Crown Prince Haakon. International Olympic Committee

On 9 October 2009, Crown Prince Frederik was elected a member of the International Olympic Committee, replacing former Danish member Kaj Holm, who had reached the age of retirement. The Crown Prince's candidature was met with some skepticism in Denmark, as it would mean that the Crown Prince would be on a semi-political committee along with several people who are suspected or even convicted of criminal acts. Another concern was whether or not the Crown Prince's loyalty would be towards his country and government, as the Danish constitution prescribes, or with the International Olympic Committee, as is sworn upon election to the committee. The Crown Prince was given special observer status in National Olympic Committee and Sports Confederation of Denmark, as a way to allow him to work, without having political power. On 19 June 2017, the Crown Prince announced that he would continue another term of 8 years. Royal Run

In celebration of his 50th birthday, on 21 May 2018, Frederik initiated a public running event across five cities in Denmark called Royal Run  with more than 70,000 participants, including himself and his own family. The 2020 edition was cancelled due to the COVID-19 situation in Denmark. Expeditions

The Crown Prince participated in an expedition to Mongolia in 1986. Prince Frederik was part of the polar expedition as a film photographer, whose job was to ensure an optimal coverage of this event. Crown Prince Frederik's Foundation

The purpose of the foundation is to provide financial assistance to students of social policy and sciences, for one year's study at Harvard. Titles, styles, honours and arms

Titles and styles

Frederik was originally styled "His Royal Highness Prince Frederik of Denmark". On the accession of his mother on 14 January 1972, he became known as "His Royal Highness The Crown Prince of Denmark".