Frederik IX (Christian Frederik Franz Michael Carl Valdemar Georg; 11 March 1899 – 14 January 1972) was King of Denmark from 1947 to 1972. Frederik was born into the House of Glücksburg during the reign of his great-grandfather King Christian IX. He was the first child of Prince Christian of Denmark and Princess Alexandrine of Mecklenburg-Schwerin (later King Christian X and Queen Alexandrine). In 1935, he married Princess Ingrid of Sweden. They had three daughters: Margrethe, Benedikte and Anne-Marie. During Nazi Germany's occupation of Denmark, Frederik acted as regent from 1942 until 1943 on behalf of his father, who had suffered a horseback riding accident in October 1942. Frederik died in 1972, and was succeeded by his eldest daughter, Margrethe II. Birth and family

Frederik was born on 11 March 1899 at his parents' country residence, the Sorgenfri Palace, located on the shores of the small river Mølleåen in Kongens Lyngby north of Copenhagen on the island of Zealand in Denmark, during the reign of his great-grandfather King Christian IX. His father was Prince Christian of Denmark (later King Christian X), the eldest son of Crown Prince Frederik and Princess Louise of Sweden (later King Frederik VIII and Queen Louise). His mother was Alexandrine of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, the eldest daughter of Frederick Francis III, Grand Duke of Mecklenburg-Schwerin and Grand Duchess Anastasia Mikhailovna of Russia. The young prince had 21 godparents: Christian IX of Denmark (his paternal great-grandfather); Crown Prince Frederik of Denmark (his paternal grandfather); the Dowager Grand Duchess Anastasia of Mecklenburg-Schwerin (his maternal grandmother); Grand Duke Michael Nikolaevich of Russia (his maternal great-grandfather); Dowager Grand Duchess Marie of Mecklenburg-Schwerin (his maternal step-great-grandmother); Prince Carl of Denmark (his paternal uncle); Princess Thyra of Denmark (his paternal aunt); Frederick Francis IV, Grand Duke of Mecklenburg-Schwerin (his maternal uncle); George I of Greece (his paternal great-uncle); Albert Edward, Prince of Wales (his paternal great-uncle by marriage); Ernest August, Duke of Cumberland (his paternal great-uncle by marriage); Grand Duke Alexander Mikhailovich of Russia (his maternal great-uncle); his first cousins once removed, Nicholas II of Russia, George, Duke of York, Prince George of Greece and Denmark and Georg Wilhelm, Hereditary Prince of Hanover; Crown Prince Constantine and Crown Princess Sophia of Greece (his first cousin once removed, and his wife); his paternal great-granduncles, Prince Johann of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg and King Oscar II of Sweden and Norway; and Crown Prince Gustaf and Crown Princess Victoria of Sweden (his first cousin twice removed and his wife). The family lived in apartments in Christian VIII's Palace at Amalienborg Palace in Copenhagen, in Sorgenfri Palace near the capital and in a summer residence, Marselisborg Palace in Aarhus in Jutland, which Frederik's parents had received as a wedding present from the people of Denmark in 1898. Early life

Christian IX died on 29 January 1906, and Frederik's grandfather Crown Prince Frederik succeeded him as King Frederik VIII. Just six years later, on 14 May 1912, King Frederik VIII died, and Frederik's father ascended the throne as King Christian X. On 1 December 1918, as the Danish–Icelandic Act of Union recognized Iceland as a fully sovereign state in personal union with Denmark through a common monarch, Frederik also became crown prince of Iceland (where his name was officially spelled Friðrik). Marriage and issue

In the 1910s, Alexandrine considered the two youngest daughters of her cousin Tsar Nicholas II, Grand Duchesses Maria and Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia, as possible wives for Frederik until the execution of the Romanov family in 1918. In 1922, Frederik was engaged to Princess Olga of Greece and Denmark, his double second cousin, through King Christian IX of Denmark and the other through Frederick Francis II. Instead, on 15 March 1935, a few days after his 36th birthday, his engagement to Princess Ingrid of Sweden (1910–2000), a daughter of Crown Prince Gustaf Adolf (later King Gustaf VI Adolf of Sweden) and his first wife, Princess Margaret of Connaught, was announced. Their wedding was one of the greatest media events of the day in Sweden in 1935, and among the wedding guests were the King and Queen of Denmark, the King and Queen of Belgium and the Crown Prince and Crown Princess of Norway. Upon their return to Denmark, the couple were given Frederik VIII's Palace at Amalienborg Palace in Copenhagen as their primary residence and Gråsten Palace in Northern Schleswig as a summer residence. On 20 April 1947, Christian X died, and Frederik succeeded to the throne. He was proclaimed king from the balcony of Christiansborg Palace by Prime Minister Knud Kristensen. In other words, Denmark became a modern country, which meant new demands on the monarchy. Changes to the Act of Succession

As King Frederik IX and Queen Ingrid had no sons, it was expected that the king's younger brother, Prince Knud, would inherit the throne, in accordance with Denmark's succession law (Royal Ordinance of 1853). As a result, his eldest daughter, Margrethe, became heir presumptive. He was succeeded by his eldest daughter, Margrethe II. Following his death, Frederik's coffin was transported to his home at Amalienborg Palace, where it stood until 18 January, when it was moved to the chapel at Christiansborg Palace. Queen Ingrid survived her husband by 28 years. The name Fidde is a common diminutive nickname for people named Frederik in the southern parts of Denmark.