George II (Greek: Γεώργιος Β', romanized: Geórgios II; 19 July  1890 – 1 April 1947) was King of Greece from 27 September 1922 until 25 March 1924, and again from 25 November 1935 until his death on 1 April 1947. The eldest son of King Constantine I of Greece and Princess Sophia of Prussia, George followed his father into exile in 1917 following the National Schism, while his younger brother Alexander was installed as king. Constantine was restored to the throne in 1920 after Alexander's death, but was forced to abdicate two years later in the aftermath of the Greco-Turkish War. Greece was proclaimed a republic in March 1924 and George was formally deposed and stripped of Greek nationality. Greece was overrun following a German invasion in April 1941, forcing George into his third exile. At the end of the war, George returned to Greece after a 1946 referendum had preserved the monarchy. Early life

Birth and childhood

George was born at the royal villa at Tatoi, near Athens, the eldest son of Crown Prince Constantine of Greece and the crown princess, Sophia of Prussia. George was named after his paternal grandfather, King George I of Greece, following traditional Greek naming practices. Goudi coup and Balkan Wars

George pursued a military career, training with the Prussian Guard at the age of 18, then serving in the Balkan Wars as a member of the 1st Infantry Regiment. He was trained at the Hellenic Military Academy in Athens, which allowed him to enroll in Greece's infantry as a second lieutenant on 27 May  1909. However, it is argued by Van der Kiste that many of the officers involved in the coup blamed the high-ranking princes for the defeat of Greece in the 1897 Greco-Turkish War. They particularly placed blame on George's father, Crown Prince Constantine, believing that the royal family was monopolising the highest army positions. George, his siblings and his parents evacuated Greece and moved to Germany for three years in exile. To avoid controversy, their exile was branded as a three-year "education leave", which was approved and so George continued his military training, but with the prestigious First Foot Guards Regiment of the Prussian army. This period of absence from Greece reduced his popularity as a potential replacement for his grandfather. As Greece became more politically stable as violent protests lessened, George, his siblings and his parents returned to Greece at the end of 1910. In 1911, Prime Minister Eleftherios Venizelos allowed members of the royal family to be given back their former ranks in the military, but George returned to Germany to continue training with the Prussian army. When the First Balkan War commenced in October 1912, George returned to Greece to fight against the Ottoman Empire. One such battle that George participated in was the capture of Thessaloniki on 8 November  1912, which marked major progress for Greece in the war. Crown Prince Constantine, whose popularity had grown due to Greece's successes in the First Balkan War, acceded to the throne as King Constantine I. George thus became the Crown Prince of Greece at age 23. On 30 June  1913, the Second Balkan War broke out between Bulgaria and its former allies, which included Greece. Relations between Greece and many of its Balkan allies grew during the war, notably with Romania, which paved the way towards the marriage between George and Elisabeth, the daughter of King Ferdinand I and Queen Marie of Romania. When Greece and its allies won the war in August 1913, George and his family resumed their European trips. The assassination sparked the outbreak of World War I, in which Constantine wished to maintain Greece's neutrality. Constantine believed that Greece was unready to fight after its involvement in the Balkan Wars and also feared displeasing his brother-in-law, Wilhelm II. Opposition soon accused Constantine of supporting the Triple Alliance, made up of Germany, Austria-Hungary and Italy, and relations between him and Venizelos, who believed that Greece should side with the Triple Entente, made up of Great Britain, France and Russia, quickly deteriorated. Central Greece was occupied by the Western Allies, an extension of the Triple Entente, and a National Schism between supporters of Constantine and supporters of Venizelos broke out. Constantine refused to alter his opinion and his popularity heavily decreased. On 19 June  1917, French politician and leader of the Entente Charles Jonnart ordered George's father, Constantine, to abdicate. Due to worry of the impending Allied invasion at Piraeus, Constantine agreed to be placed in exile without having to abdicate. The Allies were against establishing a republic in Greece and thus looked for a replacement. George's name was put forward, but the Allies perceived him as a germanophile, like his father, due to his links to the Prussian army and German imperial family. George's uncle, Prince George, was offered the position, but he refused out of loyalty to Constantine. Ultimately, George's younger brother, Alexander, was chosen by Venizelos and the Entente to replace Constantine. In addition, Theocletus I , the Archbishop of Athens and All Greece, did not attend. Neither Constantine nor George had renounced their rights to the throne, and Constantine told Alexander that he viewed him as the country's regent, not monarch. Almost all members of the royal family moved with them after Venizelos returned to power as head of the Cabinet and organised Greece's entry into World War I. The family were financially strained and Constantine soon became ill. At the Treaty of Sèvres and Treaty of Neuilly-sur-Seine, part of the end of World War I, Greece made territorial gains in Thrace and Anatolia. Although initially seen as gains to the country, Greece soon fell into the Second Greco-Turkish War in 1919. According to historian Marlene Eilers Koenig, George was in love with his cousin Anastasia de Torby, however their relationship was opposed by George's mother, Sophia, as Anastasia was the result of a morganatic marriage. Parliament continued to refuse the crown to either George or Constantine, so it was offered to Constantine's third son, Paul, who refused to break the legitimate line of succession. Greece was making no progress in the Greco-Turkish War and in the 1920 Greek legislative election, Venizelos was voted out of office. Dimitrios Rallis, a monarchist, was appointed prime minister and the 1920 Greek referendum restored Constantine to the throne. Before Venizelos fled to Constantinople in exile, he asked George's grandmother, Olga Constantinovna, to act as regent while Constantine returned to Greece. On 19 December, George returned to Greece as the crown prince under his father's second reign. Constantine's restoration to the Greek throne was opposed by the former Allies of World War I, and thus Greece received minimal support in the Greco-Turkish War against Mustafa Kemal's Turkey. The former Allies stated that they were not ready to provide support, and continued to hold distaste against Constantine. For example, at the wedding of Princess Helen and Crown Prince Carol, the British ambassador and his wife refused to greet Constantine and Sophia. In response to the ongoing war, Constantine quickly assumed the role of commander-in-chief of the army and resided in Asia Minor from May to September 1921. Greece was pushed back from the Anatolian lands granted to them in the Treaty of Sèvres to Ankara and suffered heavy defeats at the Battle of Sakarya in August and September 1921. Prince Andrew, the father of the future Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, fled from Asia Minor before Greece's defeat at Sakarya, which was mocked by Turkish forces. Though George and Elisabeth's mother were attempting to convince her to return to Greece, her health never fully recovered after her miscarriage. When the Turks again defeated Greece at the Battle of Dumlupınar, a sector of the military, led by colonels Nikolaos Plastiras and Stylianos Gonatas, demanded the abdication of Constantine and the dissolution of the parliament. First reign

To avoid more unrest, Constantine officially abdicated on 27 September  1922 and moved to Italy with Sophia and his daughters in exile, while George became monarch. George left for Bucharest to retrieve his wife and the pair returned to Greece to be crowned. In Greece, there had been greater political instability since the 1922 Greek coup d'état, which influenced Constantine's abdication, and a large influx of refugees from Asia Minor as a result of the war. George and Elisabeth were confined to Tatoi and were highly monitored by the government, while George worried about the growing instability in Greece and criticism from the former Allies, who had previously refused to recognise Constantine's second reign. On 5 December , a British ship was sent to transport Andrew and his family, including the young Prince Philip, out of Greece and to Britain, to the dismay of George. Constantine died in Palermo on 11 January 1923  without being granted a state funeral, which left George considering abdication. Many commented that his moody, sullen personality seemed more appropriate for his ancestral homeland of Denmark than Greece. After the death of Sophia in 1932, George chose to permanently leave Bucharest and his wife to establish his residence in London. Under Lord Willingdon, the Viceroy and Governor-General of India, George was treated as the sovereign of Greece and met numerous officials stationed there, while being enthusiastically interested in the Indian culture. In just over ten years, Greece had twenty-three governments, thirteen coup d'états and one dictatorship. Having failed to restore political stability, the republicanism movement in Greece became criticised and opposed by the public. Before returning to Greece, they first travelled to France and Italy. Kondylis lost his status as Regent of Greece, but ensured that George kept him as prime minister, before awarding him with the Grand Cross of the Order of George I. In the election, the Communist Party of Greece (KKE) gained fifteen seats, which established it as a buffer between monarchists and republicans. George told his cousin, Princess Victoria Louise of Prussia, that he felt so isolated that he could not trust anyone in Greece. He was weary of Metaxas when taking these trips and would never be away from Greece for too long. His trips though allowed for the acquisition by Greece of more military equipment and vehicles from Britain. In November 1936, he sent Paul to Florence to recover the bodies of their parents, Constantine and Sophie, and of their grandmother, Olga. They were transferred to Greece by the ship Averof and exhibited for the public for six days in the Metropolitan Cathedral of Athens. World War II

Home front

On 2 June 1940 Frederica gave birth to the future Constantine II. Mussolini commenced a violent propaganda campaign against Greece and accused George, who had declared Greece's neutrality, of harbouring British ships in Greek waters. The Nazi government in Germany proposed mediation between Italy and Greece. Hitler promised that if George, who he saw as an anglophile, abdicated from the throne, Germany would guarantee no Italian invasion of Greece and grant Greece territories off the coast of the Balkans. Greece successfully repelled the Italian invasion and launched a successful counter-attack, eventually occupying the southern half of Italian Albania. Finally, Emmanouil Tsouderos, former governor of the Bank of Greece, was chosen, chiefly on account of his known Anglophile sentiments, Venizelist past, and Cretan origin-where with mainland Greece being overrun, the government was preparing to evacuate too. Hitler had named George the "number one enemy of the Reich in Greece" and George had narrowly escaped German paratroopers, so he decided that the royals and the government were to evacuate. Perhaps deeply paranoid and insecure, George believed that the British government was plotting to prevent his return to Greece, despite all of the evidence to the contrary. In occupied Greece, however, the leftist partisans of the National Liberation Front (EAM) and National Popular Liberation Army (ELAS), now unfettered by Metaxas's oppression, had become the largest Greek Resistance movement, enjoying considerable popular support. As liberation drew nearer however, the prospect of George's return caused dissensions both inside Greece and among the Greeks abroad. In November 1943, George wrote to Tsouderos, "I shall examine anew the question of the date of my return to Greece in agreement with the Government". After Italy joined the Allies on 8 September 1943, communists in Greece seized weapons of the Axis and gained territorial power within the country. There were growing calls for George to hold a referendum and appoint a regent before he returned to Greece. It was suggested that the regent be the Archbishop of Athens and All Greece, Archbishop Damaskinos, who was a strong supporter of republicanism, and thus George heavily opposed this. Communists became the monarchy's main political opponent and a rival communist-led government, called the Political Committee of National Liberation, was established in occupied Greece and a pro-EAM mutiny, the 1944 Greek naval mutiny, among the armed forces in the Middle East, occurs. Finally, Greece is liberated from the Axis. As late as Christmas Eve 1944, during the height of the Dekemvriana, George had rejected the compromise solution of a regency, demanding that he return to Greece at once to reclaim his throne. Return to Greece

Though World War II was over, political instability in Greece remained very high. The official Allied observation report recorded, "There is no doubt in our minds that the party representing the government view exercised undue influence in securing votes in support of the return of the King."


The new prime minister, Konstantinos Tsaldaris, went to London to invite George II back to Greece. On 27 September, George returned to Elefsina, Greece, and met with Paul and Frederica. While the Greek Civil War began raging in the north, the Paris Peace Treaties on 10 February 1947 allows Greece to annex the Dodecanese islands, which had been Italian territories since the Italo-Turkish War between 1911 and 1912. George's nephew, Constantine, thus became the crown prince. Several short films centred on the sovereign and his government were thus shot, such as Heroic Greece! Philately

Various stamps bearing the effigy of George II have been issued by Greek Post during his reign:


Numismatics

Various Greek coins bearing the image of George II have been issued by the Bank of Greece.