George William, Hereditary Prince of Hanover, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg (German: Georg Wilhelm Christian Albert Edward Alexander Friedrich Ernst Waldemar Adolf; 28 October 1880 – 20 May 1912) was a German prince from the House of Hanover. He was the second child and eldest son of Ernest Augustus, Crown Prince of Hanover and Duke of Cumberland, and Princess Thyra of Denmark. His father was the only son of George V of Hanover and his mother was the youngest daughter of Christian IX of Denmark. His great-grandfather, Prince Ernest Augustus, Duke of Cumberland and Teviotdale, the fifth son of George III of the United Kingdom, became king of Hanover in 1837 because Salic Law barred Queen Victoria from inheriting the Hanoverian throne. His godparents included his maternal grandfather Christian IX of Denmark, his uncle George I of Greece, his uncle Frederick, Crown Prince of Denmark, his uncle Alexander Alexandrovich, Tsarevich of Russia, his uncle Albert Edward, Prince of Wales, his uncle Prince Valdemar of Denmark, Prince George, Duke of Cambridge, and William, Duke of Brunswick. The family had lived in exile in Austria since the Kingdom of Hanover was annexed by Prussia in the aftermath of the 1866 Austro-Prussian War. His father succeeded as pretender to the Hanoverian throne and as Duke of Cumberland and Teviotdale in the peerage of Great Britain in 1878. George William was heir apparent to the dukedom of Cumberland and to the Hanoverian claim. Otto von Bismarck blocked Crown Ernest Augustus's claim because he had never relinquished his claim to Hanover and instead appointed Prince Albert of Prussia regent. Prince Albert died in 1906 and Crown Ernest Augustus offered that he and George William would renounce their claims to Brunswick to allow his second son Prince Ernest Augustus to succeed. In response to George William's death, Wilhelm II, German Emperor, sent his sons Prince Eitel Friedrich and Prince August Wilhelm of Prussia to Nackel and sent a message of condolence to the Duke of Cumberland. In Berlin, Ernest Augustus met and fell in love with the emperor's only daughter, Princess Victoria Louise of Prussia. They married in 1913, thus reconciling the Houses of Hohenzollern and Hanover, and the Emperor approved Ernest Augustus's succession to the duchy of Brunswick shortly after.