Grand Duchess Kira Kirillovna of Russia (9 May 1909 – 8 September 1967) was the second daughter of Grand Duke Kirill Vladimirovich of Russia and Princess Victoria Melita of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha. She married Prince Louis Ferdinand of Prussia, grandson of the last German Emperor Wilhelm II. Early life

Grand Duchess Kira Kirilovna of Russia was born on 9 May 1909, at her parents' house on Avenue Henri Martin in Paris. Named after her father, she was the second child of Grand Duke Kirill Vladimirovich of Russia, and his wife, Princess Victoria Melita of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha. The Russian Orthodox religion forbids the marriage of two first cousins, so they had been forced to live abroad. In addition, her mother had divorced her former husband, Ernest Louis, Grand Duke of Hesse, the brother of the Tsarina Alexandra Feodorovna. In 1908, after the death of Grand Duke Alexei Alexandrovich and before Kira's birth, Nicholas II restored Kirill to his rank of captain in the Imperial Russian Navy and his position as aide de camp to the emperor. He was given the title Grand Duke of Russia and from then on his wife was styled as Her Imperial Highness Grand Duchess Viktoria Feodorovna. They settled at the Cavalier's house in Tsarskoye Selo as her father, a captain in the Russian Navy, was attached to a nearby naval academy. Kira and her elder sister, Maria, had a privileged childhood. They had an English nanny and learned the languages spoken by the Romanovs: Russian, English, French, and German. Kira's early years were spent in luxury at her father's palace at 13 Glinka Street in Saint Petersburg, where her parents entertained their guests lavishly. World War I and Russian Revolution

The family was spending the summer of 1914 on their yacht in the Gulf of Finland and were in Riga when the war broke out. During World War I, Kira's father served as the commander of a unit of the Naval Guards, while her mother oversaw a motorized ambulance. At the outbreak of the Russian revolution, Kira's father marched to the Tauride Palace at the head of the Naval Guards before the establishment of the Russian Provisional Government. Following the Russian Revolution of 1917, the family initially remained living at their palace amid the upheavals. In June, Kira's father obtained permission from the provisional government to move to Finland. Kira, eight at the time, recalled that they rode on a public train. The family waited in Finland, hoping that the White guard would defeat the Bolsheviks and they could return to Russia. Kira, then age nine, amused herself by taking long walks hunting for mushrooms, and as a treat went to the cinema every Friday. Grand Duke Kirill's family stayed in Finland until May 1920. Kira was born Princess Kira Kirillovna of Russia, but her father later gave her illegally the title "Grand Duchess" when he declared himself Guardian of the Throne in 1924. Dowager Empress Maria Feodorovna openly mocked Kirill's pretension. Blonde-haired, blue-eyed Kira, high-spirited and straightforward also had an even temper. Kira also frequently visited her cousins at various royal courts or attended house parties in the United Kingdom. Princess Kira had some difficulty finding a suitable husband. She was interested in the hemophiliac Alfonso, Prince of Asturias, son of Alfonso XIII of Spain, but was disappointed when the prince showed more interest in one of the daughters of Prince Nicholas of Greece. Later, she was fond of Prince Constantine "Teddy" Soutzo, a Romanian aristocrat. Finally, Kira married Prince Louis Ferdinand of Prussia in 1938. Her children were:


After World War II

Kira was called upon to testify in the case of Anna Anderson, the woman who claimed to be Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia. Kira had met Anderson briefly in 1952 at the urging of her mother-in-law, Crown Princess Cecilie of Prussia, who believed Anderson's claim. Kira was not convinced. Kira had last seen Anastasia when she was a child of seven. Kira's uncle, Grand Duke Andrei Vladimirovich of Russia had been convinced Anderson was Anastasia, but her father and mother were unconvinced by Anderson's claim. In later years, Kira was disappointed when her eldest son, Friedrich Wilhelm, renounced his rights to the title and married a commoner. She was in good spirits on a visit to her brother Grand Duke Vladimir of Russia at Saint-Briac in September 1967, where she ate well and dumped several spoonfuls of sugar into her coffee, commenting, "God forbid I should eat anything healthy!" That night, she suffered a heart attack and soon died.