Lord Frederick Michael George David Louis Windsor (born 6 April 1979) is a member of the British royal family. He is married to British actress Sophie Winkleman and is a financial analyst by profession. Early life and education

Frederick Michael George David Louis Windsor was born on 6 April 1979 at St Mary's Hospital, London, and was christened on 11 July at the Chapel Royal, St James's Palace, Westminster. Frederick and his sister, Lady Gabriella, were brought up in the Church of England. Career

After graduating, Frederick worked as a fashion model, appearing in a campaign for Burberry and for the designer Tomasz Starzewski, and also as a music journalist, notably for Tatler magazine. Personal life

On St Valentine's Day, 14 February 2009, Frederick became engaged to the actress Sophie Winkleman. On 20 January 2016, it was announced Frederick and Sophie had become parents to a second daughter, Isabella Alexandra May, who was born on 16 January 2016 at Chelsea and Westminster Hospital in London. From September 2016 until its closure in 2023, Frederick was president of the charity Soldier On!, which supported vulnerable, disadvantaged, or socially isolated people through archaeology and heritage projects as well as personal development workshops. On 21 February 2017, Frederick was inducted into the Grand Order of Water Rats charitable fraternity. Titles and styles

Under letters patent issued in 1917 and still in force today, Frederick's father is entitled to the dignity of prince and the style His Royal Highness as the son of a son of George V. Although these letters do not bestow these royal dignities beyond grandchildren of monarchs (except in the case of the children of the Prince of Wales, as modified by Elizabeth II), they allow the children of sons of sons of a British monarch to be styled as the children of a duke, with the honorific courtesy style of Lord or Lady before their given names. Since Lord Frederick is not a peer in his own right, his style is not hereditary and his children are not entitled to any distinctions, including the prefix The Honourable.