The Duchess of Montpensier


The Count of ÉvreuxThe Countess of Évreux


Princess Béatrice


The Duke of OrléansThe Duchess of Orléans


The Dowager Countess of La Marche


The Countess of Schönborn-Buchheim


Princess Hélène, Countess of Limburg Stirum


The Dowager Duchess of Calabria


The Dowager Duchess of Württemberg


Princess Claude, Mrs. Gandolfi


Princess Chantal, Baroness of Sambucy de Sorgue


Prince Jean Carl Pierre Marie d'Orléans, Count of Paris (born 19 May 1965) is the current head of the House of Orléans. Jean is the second son of Henri, Count of Paris (1933–2019) and his former wife Duchess Marie-Thérèse of Württemberg (born 1934). Biography

Early life and education

Jean d'Orléans was born on 19 May 1965 in Boulogne-Billancourt, the son of Henri of Orleans and Maria Theresa of Württemberg. He received as godfather, his maternal uncle, Carl of Württemberg, and as godmother, his paternal aunt, Princess Chantal of Orleans. First engagement

Prince Jean was due to marry Duchess Tatjana of Oldenburg (b. Duchess Tatjana is the youngest daughter of Duke Johann of Oldenburg (b. However, the wedding was cancelled at the last moment because of a dispute over religious denomination: Jean's father, Henri, feared the Orléans claim to the throne would be compromised if there were to be a Protestant heir. Second engagement and marriage

On 29 November 2008, Henri, then Count of Paris, announced the engagement of Jean, the then Duke of Vendôme, to Maria Magdalena Philomena Juliana Johanna de Tornos y Steinhart, born in Vienna on 19 June 1977. In 1886, the château was bequeathed to the Institute of France by Jean's ancestor Henri d’Orléans, with the caveat that the property would never be altered by the institute. The Saint-Louis foundation was later founded by Jean's grandfather, Henri VI, Count of Paris, in 1974. Following the death of his father, it was initially thought that Prince Jean would not assume the title of Count of Paris for several months after his father's death, and possibly not for as much as one year.