Lady Pamela Carmen Louise Hicks (née Mountbatten; born 19 April 1929) is a British aristocrat and relative of the British royal family. She is the younger daughter of Admiral of the Fleet the 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma (formerly Prince Louis of Battenberg) and of heiress Edwina Ashley. Early life and family

Lady Pamela was born on 19 April 1929 in Barcelona, Spain, to Edwina Ashley and the then Lord Louis Mountbatten (who later became The 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma). She is the second of two children, as a younger sister of Patricia, 2nd Countess Mountbatten of Burma. A member of the Mountbatten family by birth, she descended from the Battenberg family, a morganatic cadet branch of the House of Hesse-Darmstadt. At the request of King George V, her grandparents, Prince Louis of Battenberg and Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine, relinquished their German princely titles in 1917 in exchange for titles in the British peerage due to anti-German sentiment in Britain. Her father, who was also born a prince of Battenberg, was later created Earl Mountbatten of Burma. Her mother, Edwina, was the daughter of The 1st Baron Mount Temple. Through her mother, Lady Pamela is also a great-granddaughter of Sir Ernest Cassel and a great-great-granddaughter of The 7th Earl of Shaftesbury. Her godparents were: King Alfonso XIII and The Duke of Kent; Nadejda Mountbatten and Marjorie, Countess of Brecknock (Lady Louis' first cousin); and the Duchess of Peñaranda (María del Carmen Saavedra y Collado, Marqués de Villaviciosa).. In 1947, Lady Pamela accompanied her parents to British India, remaining with them throughout her father's term as the last Viceroy of India and then as Governor-General of post-Partition India through 1948, living with them in the palatial Viceroy's House in New Delhi and at the summer Viceregal Lodge in Simla. Following Indian independence in August 1947 she became secretary to her parents' friend and associate, V.K. Krishna Menon, then acting as Indian High Commissioner to the United Kingdom. Marriage and children

Lady Pamela is the widow of interior decorator and designer David Nightingale Hicks (25 March 1929 – 29 March 1998), son of stockbroker Herbert Hicks and Iris Elsie Platten. According to their daughter India, two ladies who knew David had been invited to the Grove by him shortly before his death. They were told by Lady Pamela that he had died a few hours ago (Hicks was lying ‘in state’ in his garden according to his instructions) but as they had driven from London, she invited them to have ‘a cup of tea’. In 2007, Lady Pamela published her memoirs of her days in New Delhi and Simla, when India was partitioned into India and Pakistan and the Union Jack came down. She wrote in India Remembered: A Personal Account of the Mountbattens During the Transfer of Power that, while her mother, Countess Mountbatten of Burma, and Jawaharlal Nehru, the future Prime Minister of India, were deeply in love, "the relationship remained platonic", In 2012, she published the second volume of her memoirs titled Daughter of Empire: Life as a Mountbatten, chronicling her childhood, her time in India, and her time as lady-in-waiting to the Queen. With her daughter, India Hicks, she attended the Queen's state funeral on 19 September 2022.