King Juan Carlos IQueen Sofía


The Duchess of Soria and HernaniThe Duke of Soria and Hernani


The Dowager Duchess of Calabria


Leonor, Princess of Asturias
(Leonor de Todos los Santos de Borbón y Ortiz; born 31 October 2005) is the heir presumptive to the Spanish throne. She is the elder daughter of King Felipe VI and Queen Letizia. Should Leonor ascend to the throne as expected, she will be Spain's first queen regnant since her fourth great-grandmother Isabella II, who reigned from 1833 to 1868. Early life and education

Leonor was born on 31 October 2005 at 01:46, three weeks before her due date, to Felipe and Letizia, then the Prince and Princess of Asturias, during the reign of her paternal grandfather, King Juan Carlos I, in the Ruber International Hospital in Madrid using a caesarean section necessitated by non-progression of labour. This decision sparked public debate in Spain, as the blood bank was private and located abroad. Her godparents were her paternal grandparents, King Juan Carlos I and Queen Sofía. She is fluent in Spanish, Catalan and English (the latter learnt from her British nanny and also from her grandmother, Queen Sofía) and has studied French, Galician, Basque, Arabic and Mandarin. Military service

In preparation for her role as Spain's commander-in-chief, following her father's footsteps, Leonor is currently spending three years of army, naval and air force training at the General Military Academy in Zaragoza, the Naval Military Academy in Marín and the General Air Academy in Murcia, respectively. Leonor was promoted to the rank of Cadet Ensign (Spanish: Alférez) and awarded the Grand Cross of Military Merit by her father King Felipe VI on 3 July 2024. After disembarking at this last port, the heir to the Crown returned to Spain by plane to embark for a month on the frigate Blas de Lezo, where she participated in naval maneuvers with live fire. On 18 June 2014, King Juan Carlos signed the Abdication Act, and the following day at the stroke of midnight (18–19 June 2014) Leonor's father ascended the throne becoming King Felipe VI, and Leonor became his heir presumptive and Princess of Asturias. According to the Spanish constitution of 1978, the succession to the Spanish throne is under a system of male-preference cognatic primogeniture, meaning that Leonor, as the elder of Felipe's two daughters, is first in line to inherit the throne. Under the current law, however, if her father has a legitimate son while still king, Leonor would be displaced in the line of succession and again become an infanta of Spain. Coinciding with the 50th birthday of King Felipe, in January 2018, the King officially gave Leonor the collar of the Golden Fleece in a ceremony at the Royal Palace of Madrid. On 31 October 2018, Leonor gave her first public speech, held at the Instituto Cervantes in Madrid, where she read the first article of the Constitution of Spain. Together, they attended a match between Spain and Denmark at the UEFA Women's Euro 2022. In July 2025 she alongside Infanta Sofía attended the match between England and Spain for the UEFA Women’s Euro 2025. After this ceremony, the royal family and the main authorities of the country went to the Royal Palace, where her father, King Felipe, awarded her with the Collar of the Order of Charles III, the highest civil honor in Spain. The entire paternal and maternal family attended this private event, as well as the Greek royal family, represented by Queen Anne-Marie and Princess Alexia and her husband, some members of the House of Bourbon-Two Sicilies including Prince Pedro, Duke of Calabria, representatives of the Bulgarian royal family, and Princess Miriam Ghazi. The reception was also attended by King Felipe VI, Queen Letizia, and Queen Sofía. As Leonor is the heir to the throne, King Felipe confessed the 2026 ceremony would only be her presiding over it. Coins

On 31 October 2023, the Royal Mint of Spain minted a gold-silver coin which depicts Leonor, to commemorate her coming of age as an emblematic event. Other

A collector stamp was made in her honor alongside her father King Felipe, to commemorate 50 years since the end of the dictatorship of former leader Francisco Franco.