Zara Anne Elizabeth Tindall (née Phillips; born 15 May 1981) is a British equestrian, Olympian, and member of the British royal family. Tindall won the individual eventing world title at Aachen in 2006 and was later named BBC Sports Personality of the Year. She married former rugby union player Mike Tindall in 2011, and the couple have three children. Early life and education

Zara Anne Elizabeth Phillips was born at 8:15 pm on 15 May 1981 at St Mary's Hospital, London. She stopped using her maiden name in March 2016 and competed as Zara Tindall for the first time during her unsuccessful attempt to qualify for the 2016 Rio Olympic Games. In 2017, Tindall finished third at the Kentucky Three-Day Event on High Kingdom, who retired from competition in 2018. Charity work

Tindall frequently supports and attends events for a range of charitable causes, particularly those connected with spinal injuries, equestrianism, and children's welfare. Tindall has appeared at events for The Caudwell Charitable Trust, which supports children with special needs, disabilities, and serious illnesses. In April 2020, Tindall participated in the Equestrian Relief initiative to help provide additional personal protective equipment for National Health Service workers. Other activities

In June 2015, Tindall launched an equestrian-themed jewellery collection, named "Zara Phillips Collection", in collaboration with Australian designer John Calleija. On 17 September 2022, during the period of official mourning for Queen Elizabeth II, Tindall joined her brother and six cousins to mount a 15-minute vigil around the coffin of the Queen, as it lay in state at Westminster Hall. On 19 September, with her husband Mike and daughter Mia, she joined other family members at the state funeral. Personal life

Phillips met rugby union player Mike Tindall, who was then playing for the England national team, during the squad's Rugby World Cup-winning campaign in Australia in 2003. The Tindalls lived in Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, before moving to Aston Farm, a seven-bedroom property adjoining the Princess Royal's Gatcombe Park estate. Tindall is a godmother to Prince George of Wales, the son of her cousin William, Prince of Wales.