Nicholas Michael de Roumanie Medforth-Mills (born 1 April 1985), formerly known as Prince Nicholas of Romania, is the eldest child and only son of Princess Elena of Romania and Robin Medforth-Mills. As a grandson of King Michael of Romania, he was third in line to the defunct throne of Romania according to a new family statute enacted in 2007, that also conferred the title of a "prince of Romania" on him which was removed in 2015. Early life

Birth

Nicholas de Roumanie Medforth-Mills was born on 1 April 1985 at La Tour Hospital in Meyrin, a commuter town near Geneva, Switzerland, the first child and son of Princess Elena of Romania and her first husband Robin Medforth-Mills and the second grandchild of King Michael I of Romania and his wife Queen Anne. He was baptized in the Orthodox faith, his godparents being Queen Anne (his maternal grandmother) and Crown Princess Margareta of Romania (his maternal aunt). Childhood

Until the age of four, Medforth-Mills lived with his sister and parents at the Romanian royal family's residence in Versoix, Switzerland. Medforth-Mills joined the Beaver Scouts at age five. Education

Medforth-Mills attended Argyle House School, Sunderland, England which he left in 1999 with eight GCSEs - English Language, English Literature, Mathematics, Science (Chemistry, Biology and Physics), French, German, Information Technology, and Geography. Before enrolling for university he took a five-year "Gap year", where:


Activities in Romania

Nicholas’s first major appearance in Romania was on 19 April 1992 on Easter Day along with his grandparents King Michael I and Queen Anne and with his mother and her second husband Alexander Nixon. Nicholas came again for the second time on Christmas Day 1997, when the entire royal family set foot in Romania for the first time after nearly five decades of exile. In 2002, he visited Romania for the third time; he stayed at Elisabeta Palace. In 2008, de Roumanie Medforth-Mills became more involved in the public life of Romania, taking part, for instance, at the 2008 UNITER theatre gala and in visits throughout the country with his aunt, Crown Princess Margareta, and  Radu Duda. Royal status

Prince of Romania

In 1997, Romanian monarchists intended to ask Michael to designate a male heir-presumptive from the House of Hohenzollern in keeping with the rules of the last royal constitution which were based on agnatic primogeniture and Salic law. However, under the influence of Queen Anne, Michael rejected the monarchists' request, and at the end of 1997, he designated Princess Margareta as heir presumptive in keeping with the European Convention on Human Rights, which meant Nicholas would only succeed to the headship of the royal family after the deaths of King Michael, Crown Princess Margareta and his mother. In 2005, King Michael told Nicholas that he could choose to have the chance of becoming a "prince of Romania" which would mean assuming responsibility in a conscious manner by starting to work for the country. On 30 December 2007, the press office of King Michael announced that Nicholas de Roumanie Medforth-Mills would receive the title "prince of Romania" with the style of "royal highness", coming into effect on Nicholas's 25th birthday. On 1 April 2010, by virtue of his new title, he became a member of the Romanian royal family and was decorated with the Nihil Sine Deo, the highest of royal decorations at the time. In February 2008, Nicholas stated in an interview with the Romanian daily newspaper Cotidianul that if the Romanian people asked him to become king, he would not refuse. In September 2012, after his university studies, he moved to Romania to undertake more of the royal family's public activities. Removal of titles and illegitimate daughter

On 1 August 2015, former King Michael of Romania signed a document removing the title prince of Romania and the qualification of royal highness from his grandson. Medforth-Mills also has been removed from the line of succession, as defined by his grandfather. The former king took the decision after considering that Romania needed a ruler marked by modesty and moral principles, respect and thought for others after the "reign and life" of his eldest daughter, Crown Princess Margareta, will have finished. Nicholas's mother, Princess Elena, received notification of the former king's decision in a personal letter. The move "stunned Romanians" and "sparked speculation that a jealous relative had sought to edge Nicholas out of the succession." The exclusion of Nicholas from the royal succession was due to the birth of an illegitimate daughter, from a short relationship with Nicoleta Cîrjan. Point 2 of the Press release stated, that on learning of the pregnancy, "I returned to Romania in November 2015 to resolve the situation with my alleged child. Allegation of assault

On 8 November 2017, during Michael I's final illness, Crown Princess Margareta filed a complaint with Swiss police alleging that Nicholas tried to force his way into his grandfather's home.