Paul (Greek: Παύλος, romanized: Pavlos; 14 December 1901 – 6 March 1964) was King of Greece from 1 April 1947 until his death on 6 March 1964. Paul was born in Athens as the third son of Crown Prince Constantine and Crown Princess Sophia of Greece. After the National Schism during World War I, Constantine's abdication was forced and Paul and his family went into exile in Switzerland. Paul's brother, Alexander, became the Greek sovereign in 1917 when Constantine and Paul were exiled, however, Alexander's death in 1920 led to Constantine's restoration. In London, Paul had an affair with his first cousin and his first love, Princess Nina Georgievna of Russia, who would eventually reject his marriage proposal. However, Paul's engagement to a German princess received a mixed reaction in Greece, especially since Adolf Hitler attempted to include Nazi swastika flags at their wedding ceremony. Paul was forced out of Greece with his family during World War II when Greece fell to the Axis Powers. When George died in 1947, Paul succeeded his brother and became the King of Greece. He was succeeded by his only son, who became Constantine II. Paul had three children: Queen Sofía of Spain, Constantine II of Greece, and Princess Irene. Early life

Paul was born on 14 December  1901 at the Tatoi Palace in Attica north of Athens, the third son of Crown Prince Constantine and his wife, Princess Sophia of Prussia. He was privately tutored by foreign teachers, Greek university professors, who were chosen by Constantine, and Dr Hoenig, his mother's Pomeranian chaplain. In 1909, when Paul was seven years old, a group of Greek officers mounted a coup d'état against his grandfather, George I of Greece. As a result of criticism, Constantine decided to move with his wife and his sons, including Paul, to Germany for several months. The family stayed with Princess Margaret of Prussia, who was Paul's maternal aunt, in Kronberg. The family returned to Greece at the beginning of 1911, when the new Greek Prime minister, Eleftherios Venizelos, allowed the princes to regain the ranks in the military. The following year, in 1912, and until 1913, Greece fought in the Balkan Wars. Greece was able to double its size in territory in the wars, during which Paul served as the youngest cadet in the Hellenic navy, at eleven years old. World War I and aftermath

National Schism

Paul's father, Constantine, ascended to the throne upon the assassination of George I in 1913. Constantine wished to keep Greece neutral during the prelude to World War I, but was in support of the Central Powers, since he was the brother-in-law of the German Kaiser, Wilhelm II. The disagreement between Constantine and Venizelos quickly resulted in the National Schism, a civil war between the two opposing sides. Per Van der Kiste, possibly due to "being afraid" of Wilhelm II, Constantine continued to refuse to succumb to Venizelos' demands. Constantine was also pressured to oppose Venizelos by Ioannis Metaxas. On 10 June 1917, Charles Jonnart, who acted as the Allies' representative in Greece, ordered Constantine to abdicate. The Allies threatened to invade Greece from a military landing at Piraeus, so Constantine unofficially abdicated. The Allies did not wish to replace Greece with a republican system, so Venizelos scrambled to find a replacement king. It was finally decided that Paul's older brother, Alexander, though not the eldest son of Constantine, would succeed to the throne, as Constantine's eldest son, George, was also seen as pro-German. The rest of the extended Greek royal family joined them when Venizelos announced Greece's entry into World War I. In 1918, Constantine contracted the Spanish flu, causing him to fall severely ill and restricting him from providing for Paul and his other children. Constantine remained concerned about Paul's lack of education after the Greek government refused his entry into the British Royal Navy. To Paul's dismay, Constantine accepted the offer made by Wilhelm II for Paul to join the Imperial German Navy. Paul continued to join the German Imperial Naval Academy, where his training was supervised by his uncle, Prince Henry of Prussia. After World War I, Greece had made territorial gains in Thrace and Anatolia per the Treaty of Sèvres, to the dismay of the Ottomans, causing the Greco-Turkish War. Despite the war's resolution, tension between Constantine and Venizelos still remained high. Paul's brother, Alexander, died of sepsis after having been bitten by a monkey, leaving Greece without a monarch and plunging the country into a constitutional crisis. The Greek parliament refused to reinstate Constantine, and thus Venizelos, on 29 October 1920, sent a letter to the Greek ambassador to Switzerland at the National Hotel in Lucerne, requesting that he meet with Paul, who he saw as the new potential king. Paul wrote that neither his father, Constantine, nor his older brother, George, had ever renounced their rights to the throne and that therefore, his ascension to the throne would be illegitimate. The Greek throne remained vacant while Greece fought in the Greco-Turkish War, during the Turkish War of Independence. During the 1920 Greek legislative election, fighting broke out between a sector of monarchists, who protested for Constantine's reascension to the throne, and supporters of Venizelos. On 14 November 1920, the monarchists won and it was organised for Constantine to become King of the Hellenes, while Venizelos was replaced with Dimitrios Rallis. Before Venizelos' exit from office, he requested that Paul's grandmother, Olga Constantinovna of Russia, act as regent before Constantine returned. Return to Greece

On 19 December 1920, Paul and the other Greek royals returned to Greece. However, Constantine's restoration was criticised by Greece's allies in the concurrent Greco-Turkish war, most of which were also Greece's allies in World War I, to which Constantine refused to join. Constantine was denied additional support from the Allies in the war against Turkey, allowing Mustafa Kemal to eventually make more territorial gains. Constantine left Paul and his other children with his wife in 1921 when he travelled to Anatolia to boost the morale of Greek troops. While on the frontlines, Constantine attempted to boost confidence by reminding soldiers of their successes in the Balkan Wars. However, after only a few months, Constantine reunited with his children at Tatoi in September 1921. Upon their return to Greece, Paul wished to resume his naval training and joined the Hellenic Naval Academy, taking up residence in the academy's boarding school, located in Piraeus. Despite Greece's involvement in the Turkish War of Independence, Paul never fought in a battle but participated in the evacuation of Greek and Armenian refugees from Smyrnan shores following the burning of Smyrna by Turkish troops. Turkey later defeated Greece and their allies, who had been suffering since the fall of Smyrna in August 1922. On 11 September 1922, a precinct of the army, led by colonels Nikolaos Plastiras and Stylianos Gonatas, conducted a coup d'état which turned into the 11 September 1922 Revolution, where the second abdication of Constantine was demanded, in addition to the dissolution of the Greek parliament. To avoid unrest and civil war, Constantine abdicated on 27 September, before fleeing to Palermo with his wife and daughters, leaving his two sons, Paul and George, behind. With his brother remaining childless, Paul was officially declared the Crown Prince of Greece. Paul and George's father, Constantine, died in exile on 11 January 1923. The government refused to give Constantine a state funeral and Paul was placed in charge of organising his funeral in Italy. Two months after Venizelos' government was proclaimed, the Kingdom of Greece was replaced by the Second Hellenic Republic on 25 March 1924, Greece's national independence day. Two and a half weeks later, the democratically conducted 1924 Greek republic referendum occurred, confirming the abolition of the monarchy and officially removing George as Greece's head of state and Paul as the Crown Prince of Greece. The Greek royal family became stateless, however, Paul was granted a Danish passport from his cousin, Christian X of Denmark. In Bucharest, where the royal family remained, Paul was welcomed by his sister, Princess Helen, who was unhappily married to the future Carol II of Romania. Not too long after arriving in Romania, Paul departed to stay with his mother and sisters, Princess Irene and Princess Katherine, at the Viva Bobolina in Fiesole. Paul's family discovered an affair between him and Princess Nina Georgievna of Russia, but he claimed that he had fallen in love. While illegally travelling through Greece, Paul visited his former residences, Mon Repos, the former royal palace in Athens, and Tatoi. Kondylis' government proclaimed that the Kingdom of Greece had been restored, and he became the regent of Greece while George travelled from England to take back the crown. On 5 November 1935, they accepted and began their journeys back to Greece on 14 November. Before returning to Greece, they stopped in Paris and met President Albert Lebrun and their uncle, Prince Andrew. Paul became overwhelmed with his royal duties upon George's almost immediate neglect of his role within Greece. Paul frequently acted as the unofficial regent for Greece and often represented George at events, such as at the repatriation of their parents' bodies to the Tatoi burial grounds and at Venizelos' funeral in 1936. His royal duties restricted him from working out at sea, however, he worked to develop and modernise the Scouts of Greece, which he became the president of during the 1920s. Paul distanced himself from both George and Metaxas after the Scouts of Greece was forced to be integrated into the National Youth Organisation, a fascist movement supported by Metaxas. Frederica was only ten years old at the time and called Paul, who was sixteen years older, "my uncle", as Paul was a first cousin of Frederica's mother, Princess Victoria Louise. In 1934, Paul and Frederica met again in London at the wedding of Princess Marina of Greece and Denmark and Prince George, Duke of Kent. When Paul returned to Greece, his engagement was met with mixed reception. The public was also scared of the backlash from the former Allies of World War I, especially since Constantine I's marriage to a German princess had caused the National Schism within the country. Metaxas, however, approved of Paul’s marriage to Frederica because he hoped that it would strengthen ties between Greece and the fascist Nazi regime in Germany, led by Adolf Hitler, who wanted to use the marriage to spread influence in Greece. George wished to distance Greece from the dynasty's German origins and was thus opposed to their marriage. Frederica had not arrived yet in Greece when the Church of Greece asked her to adopt a Greek name as there was no Orthodox Saint yet that had ever had her first name. The Church explained that by choosing a Greek name, she would be able to identify with Greece's culture and religion, and would provide her with more popularity. In early January 1938, Frederica and her parents arrived in Greece through the country's border with Yugoslavia, where Paul and Metaxas personally greeted them. It was redecorated by his sister, Irene, before Paul and Frederica moved in. Paul and Frederica wish to name their daughter, the future Queen Sofía of Spain, Olga, but Greek naming tradition required them to name the child Sophia after Paul's mother. On 2 June 1940, Frederica gave birth to an heir, the future Constantine II. World War II

While Frederica was pregnant and giving birth to her three children, the last of which was Princess Irene, Nazi troops were gradually invading different countries throughout Europe, including France, which collapsed under the Nazi tactic of blitzkrieg. Benito Mussolini launched a violent propaganda campaign against Greece and accused George of violating its neutrality by harbouring British ships within its waters. Germany offered mediation between Greece and Italy. It was agreed that if George were to abdicate and Paul become the monarch, Germany would prevent an Italian invasion of Greece. George was furious and made the Nazis write in response to Greece's actions: "They would do better not to stick their noses in the affairs of  country in they know what is good for them!" Germany continued attempting to put Paul on the throne. Greece automatically joined the Allies and remained in close contact with their leaders. Greece successfully repelled Mussolini's invasion and occupied southern Albania. George refused to establish a national unity government and appointed the Governor of the National Bank of Greece, Alexandros Koryzis, as the new prime minister. George faced criticism not only in Greece but also by the Allies. After several victories in Albania, Greek forces capitulated in the German invasion of Greece, which proceeded the German invasion of Yugoslavia. George was given the title of "Number 1 enemy of the Reich in Greece" by Hitler and all three royals were forced to evacuate the island when the Fallschirmjäger commenced an attack. The Axis government established in occupied Greece worried Farouk of Egypt, who had many pro-Italian ministers. While there, Paul was unable to return for the birth of his third child, Irene, on 11 May 1942. Following many requests, Paul managed to gain authority to go to Cairo and join the Free Greek Forces in August 1942, wishing to help liberate Greece. However, there was growing republicanism in the Greek forces and thus George prohibited Paul from fighting in Greece. Greece was slowly liberated through 1944 and most Greek exiles had the opportunity to return home, however, Paul and his family were forced to stay in Egypt due to the rise of republican opposition in Greece following the war. Paul believed that if he were able to return to Greece, he could have acted as the regent and prevented a republican government. Meanwhile, the new Crown Prince, Constantine, was sent by Paul and Frederica to the Anavryta Experimental Lyceum in Marousi. Paul's aunt, Princess Alice of Battenberg, who was the mother of Prince Philip, regularly engaged in disagreements with Frederica, who she thought was clumsy and scared of her sister-in-law, Elena Vladimirovna of Russia. The Turkish government invited the couple to the Hagia Sophia, a Greek Orthodox Church that had been converted into a mosque and then to a museum, but they declined, instead only visiting the tomb of Mustafa Kemal. The state visit marked the first time a Greek head of state had made a state visit to Turkey, which had occupied Greece for over 400 years. Alongside Paul were members of the British royal family, Haakon VII of Norway, Frederik IX of Denmark, Gustaf VI Adolf of Sweden and President Vincent Auriol of France. Paul and Frederica also made trips to different regions of Greece. Paul also habitually ensured that Greece's borders with its neighbours were secured. Albrecht, Duke of Bavaria, and his family took part in these trips, which is why he decided to return to Paul the Greek crown jewels of the Wittelsbach king Otto of Greece, who had been deposed in 1862. It had been almost a century since they were last in Greece. Despite Greek visits to the United Kingdom, links with Britain became strained over Cyprus, where the majority Greek population favored union with Greece, which Britain, as the colonial power, would not endorse. The idea of a union between Greece and Cyprus became known as enosis. The talks only resulted in stiff relations between Greece, Turkey, and Britain. Paul and Greece's reputation in Turkey was then damaged by the Istanbul pogrom. After the British government arrested Archbishop Makarios III and deported him to the Seychelles, anti-British sentiment in Greece grew as displayed through protests in some of Greece's largest cities. The Turkish government then proposed Taksim, which would divide Cyprus between Greece and Turkey, however, both Greece and Paul opposed this idea. On 5 February 1959, the London and Zürich Agreements established the resumption of real negotiations between Greece and Turkey, to the delight of Paul. Economic miracle and growing authoritarianism

Greece was one of the first nations to benefit from the Marshall Plan and took advantage of American economic aid. Between 1948 and 1952, Greece received over US$376 million in financial aid from the United States. Economic growth was also due to growing political stability within Greece, something that Paul was greatly credited for. In eleven years, Greece was governed by only two prime ministers, Papagos and Konstantinos Karamanlis, a record for the past few decades. Economists, however, continued to worry about the fact that Greece's economy was very reliant on foreign loans and a majority of food consumed needed to be imported into the country. Although written out as a constitutional monarchy, critics of Greece's politics claimed that the country contained traits of an authoritarian monarchy. Later reign

On 2 June 1958, Crown Prince Constantine turned 18 and thus commenced his royal duties. Constantine often shadowed Paul, who taught him the role of being the monarch. Paul was also very weary of the struggles he and his brother faced and wished to teach Constantine ways of avoiding the types of issues they experienced. Since the age of six, Constantine accompanied Paul in his sailing trips, and in December 1958, Paul and Frederica gifted him with his private sailboat. Constantine trained daily with Odysseus Eskitzoglou and Georgios Zaimis. It was marked with celebrations in Greece, being the second time Greece had won a gold medal in the Modern Olympics, the first being at the 1896 Summer Olympics and won by Spyridon Louis. Paul was also pleased with the wedding of his eldest daughter, Sofía, to Prince Juan Carlos of Spain, who was the heir to the Spanish throne. After having first met on the Cruise of the Kings, Sofía and Juan Carlos reunited at the Rome Olympics, where their relationship and future marriage was pathed. In early 1963, Frederica was invited to attend the wedding of Princess Alexandra of Kent and Angus Ogilvy. Protests against Frederica were held in the United Kingdom, however few were in Greece. Papandreou and his allies used it as an opportunity to claim that the lack of protests in Greece was because the monarchy had restricted freedom of speech, saying that Greece had committed "crimes". Paul soon became medically restricted to Tatoi, where Frederica took care of him, while Constantine urgently travelled to Tinos to bring a holy icon. Paul was succeeded by his son, who became King Constantine II. In popular culture

Film and documentaries

Paul appears in various films and documentaries:


Numismatics

Various coins featuring Paul were issued by the National Bank of Greece:


Philately

Various stamps featuring Paul were issued by the Hellenic Post:


Honours

Marriage and issue

On 9 January 1938, Paul married Princess Frederica of Hanover, his first cousin once removed through Frederick III, German Emperor, and Victoria, Princess Royal, and second cousin through Christian IX of Denmark, in Athens.