Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh (born Prince Philip of Greece and Denmark,
later Philip Mountbatten; 10 June 1921 – 9 April 2021), was the husband of Queen Elizabeth II and served as consort of the British monarch from her accession on 6 February 1952 until his death in 2021, making him the longest-serving royal consort in British history. Philip was born in Greece into the Greek and Danish royal families. Educated in France, Germany, and the United Kingdom, he joined the Royal Navy in 1939 at the age of 18. In July 1939, he began corresponding with Princess Elizabeth, then aged 13, the elder daughter and heir presumptive of King George VI. During the Second World War, Philip served with distinction in the Mediterranean and Pacific fleets of the Royal Navy. In November 1947, he married Elizabeth, was granted the style "His Royal Highness", and was created Duke of Edinburgh, Earl of Merioneth, and Baron Greenwich. They had four children: Charles, Anne, Andrew, and Edward. He served as patron, president, or member of more than 780 organisations, including the World Wide Fund for Nature, and was chairman of The Duke of Edinburgh's Award, an international youth awards programme for people aged 14 to 24. Early life and education

Family, infancy and exile from Greece

Philip (Greek: Φίλιππος, romanised: Phílippos) was born on 10 June 1921 on the dining room table at Mon Repos, a villa on the Greek island of Corfu. He was the only son and the fifth and final child of Prince Andrew of Greece and Denmark and his wife, Princess Alice of Battenberg. Philip's father was the fourth son of King George I and Queen Olga of Greece, and his mother was the eldest child of Louis Mountbatten, 1st Marquess of Milford Haven, and Victoria Mountbatten, Marchioness of Milford Haven (formerly Prince Louis of Battenberg and Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine). A member of the House of Glücksburg, Philip was a prince of both Greece and Denmark by virtue of his patrilineal descent from George I of Greece and George's father, Christian IX of Denmark; he was from birth in the line of succession to both thrones. His godparents were his paternal grandmother, Queen Olga of Greece; his cousin George, Crown Prince of Greece; his uncle Lord Louis Mountbatten; and the municipality of Corfu, represented by its mayor, Alexandros Kokotos, and by the president of the council, Stylianos Maniarizis. The Marquess of Milford Haven was a naturalised British subject who, after a career in the Royal Navy, had renounced his German titles and adopted the surname Mountbatten – an Anglicised form of Battenberg – during the First World War owing to anti-German sentiment in the United Kingdom. After attending his grandfather's memorial service in London, Philip and his mother returned to Greece, where Andrew had remained to command a Greek Army division in the Greco-Turkish War. Greece suffered significant losses in the conflict, while the Turkish forces made substantial gains. The new military government arrested Andrew and several others. Andrew's life was also believed to be in danger, and Alice was placed under surveillance. In December, a revolutionary court banished Andrew from Greece for life. The British naval vessel HMS Calypso evacuated Andrew's family, with the infant Philip carried to safety in a fruit box. Upbringing in France, Britain and Germany

Philip's family settled in a house in the Paris suburb of Saint-Cloud lent to them by his wealthy aunt Princess George of Greece and Denmark. In 1937, his sister Cecilie; her husband, Georg Donatus, Hereditary Grand Duke of Hesse; their two sons; and Georg Donatus's mother were killed in an air crash at Ostend. Philip did not speak Greek because he had left Greece as an infant. Naval and wartime service

After leaving Gordonstoun in early 1939, Philip completed a term as a cadet at the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth, then repatriated to Greece, living with his mother in Athens for a month in mid-1939. At the behest of King George II of Greece, his first cousin, he returned to Britain in September to resume training for the Royal Navy. During the Second World War, he continued to serve in the British forces, while two of his brothers-in-law, Prince Christoph of Hesse and Berthold, Margrave of Baden, fought on the opposing German side. After the invasion of Greece by Italy in October 1940, he was transferred from the Indian Ocean to the battleship HMS Valiant in the Mediterranean Fleet. That October Philip, aged 21, became first lieutenant of HMS Wallace, one of the youngest first lieutenants in the Royal Navy. Philip returned to the United Kingdom on Whelp in January 1946 and was posted as an instructor at HMS Royal Arthur, the Petty Officers' School in Corsham, Wiltshire. Marriage

In 1939, the British King George VI and Queen Elizabeth toured the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth. During the visit, the Queen and Lord Louis Mountbatten asked his nephew Philip to escort the royal couple's daughters, 13-year-old Princess Elizabeth and 9-year-old Princess Margaret, who were Philip's third cousins through Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom and second cousins once removed through King Christian IX of Denmark. Philip and Elizabeth had first met as children in 1934 at the wedding of Elizabeth's uncle Prince George, Duke of Kent, to Philip's first cousin Princess Marina of Greece and Denmark. Although Philip appeared "always to have regarded himself as an Anglican", and he had attended Anglican services with his classmates and relations in England and throughout his Royal Navy career, he had been baptised in the Greek Orthodox Church. The day before the wedding, the King bestowed the style of "Royal Highness" on Philip, and on the morning of the wedding, 20 November 1947, he was created Duke of Edinburgh, Earl of Merioneth, and Baron Greenwich of Greenwich in the County of London. Consequently, being already a Knight of the Garter, between 19 and 20 November 1947 he bore the unusual style Lieutenant His Royal Highness Sir Philip Mountbatten, and is so described in the letters patent of 20 November 1947. Their first two children were born before Elizabeth's accession in 1952: Prince Charles in November 1948 and Princess Anne in August 1950. Although, as the consort of the Queen, he might in time have been made Grand Master of British Freemasonry, Elizabeth's cousin Prince Edward, Duke of Kent, assumed that role in 1967. Philip's son Charles apparently never joined Freemasonry. Consort of the Queen

Royal house

Elizabeth's accession to the throne raised the question of the name of the royal house, as she would typically have taken Philip's surname upon marriage. Lord Mountbatten advocated the name "House of Mountbatten", while Philip suggested "House of Edinburgh" after his ducal title. I am the only man in the country not allowed to give his name to his own children."


In February 1960, the Queen issued an Order in Council declaring that Mountbatten-Windsor would be the surname of the couple's male-line descendants who are not styled as "Royal Highness" or titled as prince or princess. Although Elizabeth had "absolutely set her heart" on such a change and had considered it for some time, it occurred only 11 days before the birth of their third child, Prince Andrew, and only after three months of protracted correspondence between English constitutional expert Edward Iwi – who argued that, without such a change, the royal child would be born with "the Badge of Bastardy" – and Harold Macmillan, who had attempted to refute Iwi's arguments. Philip and Elizabeth's fourth child, Prince Edward, was born in March 1964. She also intervened to ensure that Philip would serve as regent for their son Charles in the event of her unexpected death. In 1956, Philip and Kurt Hahn founded The Duke of Edinburgh's Award to give young people "a sense of responsibility to themselves and their communities". She regarded divorce as a sadness, not a hanging offence." In a public show of support, Elizabeth created Parker a Commander of the Royal Victorian Order. She granted him the style and title of a Prince of the United Kingdom by Letters Patent on 22 February 1957; it was gazetted that Philip was to be known as "His Royal Highness The Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh". He travelled to Jerusalem to attend a ceremony at Yad Vashem honouring his mother, Princess Alice of Battenberg, who had been recognised as one of the Righteous Among the Nations for sheltering members of a Jewish family during the Nazi occupation of Greece. His first solo engagement as Duke of Edinburgh was in March 1948, presenting prizes at the boxing finals of the London Federation of Boys' Clubs at the Royal Albert Hall. He was president of the National Playing Fields Association (now known as Fields in Trust) for 64 years, from 1947 until his grandson Prince William took over the role in 2013. He was appointed a fellow of the Royal Society in 1951. He served as chancellor of the universities of Cambridge, Edinburgh, Salford, and Wales. In the same year, he became president of the Council of Engineering Institutions and, in that capacity, assisted with the inception of the Fellowship of Engineering (later the Royal Academy of Engineering), of which he later became the senior fellow. He also commissioned the Prince Philip Designers Prize and the Prince Philip Medal to recognise designers and engineers who made exceptional contributions. Charles and Diana

At the beginning of 1981, Philip wrote to his son Charles counselling him to make up his mind to either propose to Lady Diana Spencer or to end their courtship. Charles felt pressured by his father to make a decision and did so, proposing to Diana in February. Philip and Elizabeth hosted a meeting between Charles and Diana in an attempt to effect a reconciliation, but without success. Philip wrote to Diana, expressing his disappointment at both Charles's and her extra-marital affairs and asking her to examine their behaviour from each other's point of view. Charles and Diana separated in 1992 and divorced in 1996. In their grief, Diana's sons, Princes William and Harry, wished to attend church, so Philip and Elizabeth took them that morning. If I walk, will you walk with me?" On the day of the funeral, Philip, William, Harry, Charles, and Diana's brother, Earl Spencer, walked through London behind her gun carriage. He became the oldest-ever male British royal in February 2013, and in April 2019 he became the third-longest-lived member of the British royal family, after Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester, and Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother. After a recurrence of infection in August 2012, while staying at Balmoral Castle, he was admitted to Aberdeen Royal Infirmary for five nights as a precaution. He spent two nights in hospital and was unable to attend the State Opening of Parliament, and Royal Ascot. Final years and retirement

Philip retired from royal duties on 2 August 2017, meeting Royal Marines in his final solo public engagement at the age of 96. In October, he accompanied Elizabeth to the wedding of their granddaughter Princess Eugenie of York and Jack Brooksbank, with The Telegraph reporting that Philip decided whether to attend events on a "wake up and see how I feel" basis. In February 2021, Philip was admitted to King Edward VII's Hospital as a "precautionary measure" after feeling unwell; he was visited by his son Charles. Elizabeth was reported, through her son Andrew, to have said that Philip's death had "left a huge void in her life". The funeral took place on 17 April 2021 at St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, and Philip was temporarily interred alongside 25 other coffins, including that of George III, in the Royal Vault inside St George's. He was presented with Royal Air Force wings in 1953, helicopter wings with the Royal Navy in 1956, and his private pilot's licence in 1959. Strong colours, vigorous brushstrokes." He was patron of the Royal Society of Arts from 1952 until 2011. It so happens that my mother was quite seriously deaf and I have been Patron of the Royal National Institute for the Deaf for ages, so it's hardly likely that I would do any such thing." When he and Elizabeth met Stephen Menary, an army cadet blinded by a Real IRA bomb, and Elizabeth asked how much sight he retained, Philip quipped: "Not a lot, judging by the tie he's wearing." Menary later said: "I think he just tries to put people at ease by trying to make a joke. I certainly didn't take any offence." Philip's comparison of prostitutes and wives was also perceived as offensive after he reportedly stated: "I don't think a prostitute is more moral than a wife, but they are doing the same thing."


Centenary

To mark the centenary of Philip's birth in June 2021, the Royal Collection Trust held an exhibition at Windsor Castle and the Palace of Holyroodhouse. Titled Prince Philip: A Celebration, it showcased around 150 personal items related to him, including his wedding card, wedding menu, midshipman's logbook from 1940 to 1941, Chair of Estate, and the coronation robes and coronet he wore at his wife's coronation in 1953. The Royal Horticultural Society also marked Philip's centenary by breeding a new rose in his honour, christened "The Duke of Edinburgh Rose", created by British rose breeder Harkness Roses. A Duke of Edinburgh Rose has since been planted in the mixed rose border of Windsor Castle's East Terrace Garden. In September 2021, the Royal National Lifeboat Institution honoured Philip by naming a new Shannon-class lifeboat Duke of Edinburgh. In the same month, a documentary originally intended for his centenary was broadcast on BBC One under the title Prince Philip: The Royal Family Remembers, with contributions from his children, their spouses, and seven of his grandchildren. Portrayals

Philip has been portrayed by several actors, including Stewart Granger (The Royal Romance of Charles and Diana, 1982), Christopher Lee (Charles & Diana: A Royal Love Story, 1982), David Threlfall (The Queen's Sister, 2005), James Cromwell (The Queen, 2006), and Finn Elliot, Matt Smith, Tobias Menzies, and Jonathan Pryce (The Crown, 2016 onwards). Originally a prince of Greece and Denmark, he abandoned these titles before his marriage and was thereafter created a British duke, among other noble titles. Honours and honorary military appointments

Philip received medals from Britain, France, and Greece for his service during the Second World War, as well as medals commemorating the coronations of George VI and Elizabeth II, and the silver, gold, and diamond jubilees of Elizabeth. The following year, he was appointed to the equivalent positions in Canada and made Admiral of the Fleet, Captain General Royal Marines, Field Marshal, and Marshal of the Royal Air Force in the United Kingdom. In 1975, he was appointed colonel of the Grenadier Guards, a position he handed over to his son Andrew in 2017. On their 70th wedding anniversary, 20 November 2017, she appointed him Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, making him the first British national since his uncle Lord Mountbatten to be entitled to wear the breast stars of four orders of chivalry in the United Kingdom. Arms

Genealogy

Both Philip and Elizabeth were great-great-grandchildren of Queen Victoria, Elizabeth by descent from Victoria's eldest son, King Edward VII, and Philip by descent from Victoria's second daughter, Princess Alice. Both were also descended from King Christian IX of Denmark. His maternal grandmother, Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine, was a sister of Empress Alexandra of Russia. Philip, Alexandra, and her children were all descended from Princess Alice through a purely female line.