Princess Marina of Greece and Denmark (Greek: Μαρίνα; 13 December  1906 – 27 August 1968), later Duchess of Kent, was a Greek and Danish princess by birth and a British princess by marriage. A granddaughter of King George I of Greece and Queen Olga, she was the daughter of Prince Nicholas of Greece and Denmark and Grand Duchess Elena Vladimirovna of Russia. In 1934, she married Prince George, Duke of Kent, the fourth son of King George V and Queen Mary. They had three children: Edward, Alexandra, and Michael. Early life

Marina was born on 13 December 1906 in Athens, Greece, during the reign of her paternal grandfather, George I of Greece. She was the third and youngest daughter of Prince Nicholas of Greece and Denmark and his wife, Grand Duchess Elena Vladimirovna of Russia. Her father was the third son of George I of Greece and Queen Olga, while her mother was the only daughter of Grand Duke Vladimir Alexandrovich and Grand Duchess Maria Pavlovna of Russia. Through her father she was a great-granddaughter of Christian IX of Denmark, and through her mother a granddaughter of Emperor Alexander II of Russia. Marina had two elder sisters, Princess Olga and Princess Elizabeth. Olga married Prince Paul of Yugoslavia in 1923; following the assassination of his cousin, Alexander I of Yugoslavia, Paul served as Prince Regent of Yugoslavia from 1934 to 1941. One of their paternal uncles was Prince Andrew of Greece and Denmark, father of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, making Marina and her sisters Philip's first cousins. Marina spent her early years in Greece and lived with her parents and paternal grandparents at Tatoi Palace. She and her sisters were raised to be devout and religious, a quality encouraged by their grandmother, Queen Olga of Greece. The family travelled outside Greece frequently, especially during the summer months. Marriage and children

Wedding ceremony

In 1932, Marina met Prince George (later the Duke of Kent), her second cousin through Christian IX of Denmark, in London. Their betrothal was announced in August 1934, and George was created Duke of Kent on 9 October. It was the first major royal wedding since that of Prince Albert, Duke of York (later George VI), and Lady Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon (later Queen Elizabeth the Queen mother) 11 years earlier. In 1947, Marina visited Greece and Italy. The Apartment had stood vacant for nearly 15 years, having previously been the home of Princess Louise, Duchess of Argyll, prior to her death in 1939. 50 years later, at the 50th anniversary of Ghana's independence, her son, Edward, was appointed by the Queen to represent her. Marina earned a place in the International Best Dressed List Hall of Fame in 1960, together with the Princess of Monaco, Patricia Lopez-Willshaw, and Merle Oberon. The main public hospital in Gaborone, the new capital of Botswana, is named Princess Marina Hospital. She served as Chancellor of the University of Kent at Canterbury from 1963 until her death. Legacy

Marina gave her name to a number of institutions and facilities, including:


References in popular culture

Titles, styles, honours, and arms

Titles and styles

Marina was known as the Princess Marina of Greece. After her marriage she was styled Her Royal Highness The Duchess of Kent, and was later known as Her Royal Highness The Princess Marina, Duchess of Kent.