Princess Theodora of Greece and Denmark (Greek: Θεοδώρα; 30 May 1906 – 16 October 1969) was a Greek and Danish princess by birth and Margravine of Baden through her marriage to Berthold, pretender to the throne of the Grand Duchy of Baden. The second of five children of Prince Andrew of Greece and Denmark and Princess Alice of Battenberg, Theodora spent a happy childhood between Athens and Corfu. Shortly after, in 1931, Theodora married Berthold, Margrave of Baden, son of Chancellor of the German Reich Prince Maximilian. The princess gave birth to three children there: Margarita, Maximilian and Ludwig. Though not held by the Soviets, responsible for the death of several of their cousins, the couple was ostracized by the British royal family at the time of the marriage of Prince Philip, Theodora's only brother, to Princess Elizabeth of the United Kingdom (later Queen Elizabeth II) in 1947. Over the years, the couple was nevertheless reintegrated into the life of the European elite, as illustrated by their invitation and presence at the coronation of Elizabeth II in 1953 and at the wedding of Juan Carlos, Prince of Asturias, and Princess Sophia of Greece and Denmark in 1962. She was the paternal aunt of the Prince of Wales, who later became King Charles III. Biography

Childhood

In Greece and abroad

The second daughter of Prince Andrew of Greece and Denmark and Princess Alice of Battenberg, Theodora was born at Tatoi Palace, near Athens, on 30 May 1906. At the time of her birth, her father was traveling to Spain, where he represented the Greek royal family on the occasion of the marriage of King Alfonso XIII of Spain to Princess Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg, a cousin of her mother Alice. Baptised "Theodora" in honor of the Byzantine empress, but nicknamed "Dolla" by her family, the princess was raised within a united household, together with her elder sister Margarita, and younger sisters Cecilie, and Sophie. Theodora's early childhood was affected by the instability that the Kingdom of Greece experienced at the start of the twentieth century. Tired of attacks from the press and the opposition, Andrew and Alice found refuge in travel and spent most of the period between 1907 and 1908 outside the borders of their country. With their daughters, they stayed in the United Kingdom, Germany, Malta and Russia, where they reunited with their many relatives including Edward VII of the United Kingdom, Ernest Louis, Grand Duke of Hesse, Alexandra Feodorovna, and Prince and Princess Louis of Battenberg (Alice's parents). At this time, Theodora was introduced to her young maternal uncle and aunt, Louis and Louise, to whom she and her sister Margarita later became very close. In 1909, the Goudi coup occurred, a military putsch organized against the government of King George I of Greece, Theodora's grandfather. Shortly after this event, Prince Andrew and his brothers were forced to resign from the army. Concerned about the political situation of their country, Andrew and Alice once again found refuge abroad and stayed in the United Kingdom, France and Hesse. After considering a life in exile for a while, the couple returned to live in Greece, where their third daughter was born. The Balkan Wars and the First World War

Between 1912 and 1913, Greece engaged in the Balkan Wars, which put the country in opposition to the Ottoman Empire and to Bulgaria. Called to join the army again, Prince Andrew served under Crown Prince Constantine, while Princess Alice worked as a nurse for wounded soldiers. Greece came out of the Balkan Wars with an expanded territory, but the conflict also led to the assassination of George I in March 1913. In his will, the sovereign bequeathed the Corfiote palace of Mon Repos to Andrew. After years of living in close proximity to the monarch, in the palaces of Athens and Tatoi, Andrew and his family therefore finally had their own residence. When peace returned, Andrew, Alice and their daughters left Greece in August 1913. Returning to Greece on 17 November 1913, the family was then retained in the country by Alice's fourth pregnancy and, above all, by the outbreak of the First World War. With Greece having proclaimed its neutrality, this new conflict initially hardly affected Theodora and her relatives. Stationed in Thessaloniki with his garrison, Andrew was thus confronted with the occupation of the city by the Allies in October 1915. Shortly after, in December, the routed Serbian army found refuge in Corfu, leading Alice and her daughters to abandon Mon Repos for the capital. Exile in Switzerland

In June 1917, King Constantine I was deposed and driven out of Greece by the Allies, who replaced him on the throne by his second son, the young Alexander. In the months that followed, she also reconnected with her maternal grandparents, whom the war had forced to abandon the name of Battenberg for that of Mountbatten. For Theodora, who now formed a duo with her elder sister Margarita, exile was synonymous with sadness but also an opportunity for long family reunions and walks in the mountains. Young adulthood

Brief return to Greece

On 2 October 1920, King Alexander, cousin of Theodora, was bitten by a domestic monkey during a walk in Tatoi. The death of the sovereign caused a violent institutional crisis in Greece. Prince Andrew was received triumphantly in Athens on 23 November 1920, and his wife and four daughters joined him a few days later. At the same time, Princess Alice found out that she was pregnant again. On 10 June 1921, the family welcomed Prince Philip of Greece and Denmark (later Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, 1921–2021). The joy that surrounded this birth, however, was obscured by the absence of Prince Andrew, who joined the Greek forces in Asia Minor during the Occupation of Smyrna. In March 1921, the princesses attended in Athens the wedding of their cousin Helen to Crown Prince Carol of Romania. However, the military defeat of Greece against Turkey and the political unrest that it caused disrupted the life of Theodora and her family. A month later, Prince Andrew was arrested before being tried by a military tribunal, which declared him responsible for the defeat of the Sakarya. After a brief stop in Corfu, the prince and his relatives hurriedly left Greece aboard HMS Calypso in early December 1922. Settled in a house adjoining the home of Princess Marie Bonaparte, the family depended for seven years on her generosity, and two other aunts of Theodora: first Princess Anastasia and then Lady Louis Mountbatten. Now of marrying age, the princess and her sister Margarita regularly left France for the United Kingdom, where they lived with their maternal grandmother, the Dowager Marchioness of Milford Haven. This did not prevent them from rejoicing for their aunt Louise when she was asked by Gustaf Adolf, Crown Prince of Sweden, to marry him in June 1923. Alice's confinement

Theodora, Margarita and Philip spent the summer of 1928 in Romania. Invited by Princess Helen, whose son Michael I was the same age as Philip, the two young women and their brother stayed for several weeks in Sinaia. At the time, Prince Nicholas of Romania was still single and Helen wanted to see him marry one of her relatives, but her plans for her brother-in-law to marry one of her cousins came to nothing. A few months after this trip, Alice began to suffer from psychological problems. Distraught by the situation, Prince Andrew finally made the decision to place his wife in a sanatorium. He took advantage of his family's stay in Darmstadt, Germany, in April 1930, to send Alice to a psychiatric hospital located in Kreuzlingen, Switzerland. Sophie married Prince Christoph of Hesse in December 1930, followed by Cecilie who married Georg Donatus, Hereditary Grand Duke of Hesse in February 1931, and Margarita who married Gottfried, Hereditary Prince of Hohenlohe-Langenburg in April 1931. Settling in Germany

Marriage and settling in Salem

In June 1931, Théodora became engaged to Berthold, Margrave of Baden. Son of the last chancellor of the German Empire and titular Grand Duke of Baden from November 1929, Berthold was in charge of a substantial fortune. On 17 August 1931, Theodora and Berthold married in a double religious ceremony, both Lutheran and Orthodox, at the Neues Schloss in Baden-Baden, which resulted in a large family reunion, at which the bride's mother, Princess Alice, was not present. The Margrave and Margravine of Baden had three children: Margarita (1932–2013), Maximilian (1933–2022) and Ludwig (born 1937). Concerned about her mother's fate, Theodora visited her several times in Kreuzlingen, but Alice did not always receive her daughter warmly. The Dowager Marchioness of Milford Haven stayed on several occasions with her granddaughter, as did Prince Andrew. Political upheavals

While several of their relatives such as Cecilie and Margarita, (Theodora's sisters) as well as Marie Alexandra (Berthold's sister), gradually joined the Nazi Party, the Margrave and Margravine of Baden tried to keep their distance from the Nazi regime. At the beginning of 1936, the banishment sentence issued in 1922 against Theodora's father Prince Andrew was lifted, which allowed him to stay in his country again. Estranged from her husband since her confinement, Princess Alice made the choice to return and live in Athens, where she settled in November 1938. In the meantime, Theodora also returned to Greece with Berthold on the occasion of the marriage of Crown Prince Paul to Princess Frederica of Hanover in January 1938. Affected by the occupation of Greece by the Nazis, Theodora was cut off from a large part of her family because of the conflict. Her father, Prince Andrew, found himself isolated on the French Riviera and contacting him became very difficult. Finally, in December 1944, her father Prince Andrew died in Monaco without having been able to see his children again. Post-war years

Occupation of Germany and Philip's marriage

The defeat of Germany and its occupation by the Allies brought new upheavals in the life of the former German princely families, several of whom (such as Hermine Reuss of Greiz, Joachim Ernst, Duke of Anhalt, or Georg, Prince of Saxe-Meiningen) perished in hands of the Soviets. Baden was placed under the administration of France and the United States, however, Berthold and Theodora were not under threat, and it did not take long for the margrave to find a leading social role. Berthold was thus able to reopen the Salem School, which he entrusted to his cousin, Prince George William of Hanover, in 1948. Since 1939, he had been linked to Princess Elizabeth of the United Kingdom, and the two's engagement was officially announced on 10 July 1947. Prince Philip found himself unable to invite his sisters to his wedding. Aware of the difficulties their brother had to face, Theodora, Margarita and Sophie considered their sidelining wrong and hurtful. Invited by the Duke and Duchess of Brunswick, they celebrated the union of their brother in the company of their cousin Princess Elizabeth of Greece and Denmark and Prince Louis and Princess Margaret of Hesse and by Rhine. A few days later, the Greek princesses received a visit from the Queen of the Hellenes (who came to bring them a letter from their mother Princess Alice describing the wedding in detail) and the Duchess of Kent. Reintegration into royal circles

Once the monarchy was restored in Greece in 1946, Theodora and her husband were regularly invited to Athens. Theodora and her family were also invited to Athens on the occasion of the marriage of Princess Sophia of Greece and Denmark and Juan Carlos, Prince of Asturias in 1962, and the marriage of King Constantine II and Princess Anne-Marie of Denmark in 1964. The Margrave and Margravine of Baden also regularly invited their families to their residence in Salem. The marriages of their daughter Margarita to Prince Tomislav of Yugoslavia in 1957 and their son Maximilian to Archduchess Valerie of Austria in 1966 were the occasions for great meetings of the European aristocracy. In 1965, Theodora organized a large reception in Salem on the occasion of the official trip of Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip to West Germany. Over time, her health deteriorated and she appeared very diminished at the wedding of Prince Juan Carlos and Princess Sophia in 1962. Theodora's last years were affected by the establishment of the Regime of the Colonels in Greece and by the departure into exile of King Constantine II and his family. Hospitalized at the clinic of Doctor Büdingen in Konstanz, Theodora died on 16 October 1969, 7 weeks before her mother Princess Alice of Battenberg. Her funeral was held at the mausoleum of the Baden family in Salem in the presence of many members of the aristocracy, including her nephew Prince Charles, but not her brother Prince Philip who was on an official trip to Canada. Ancestry

Through her father, she was a grandchild of George I of Greece and Olga Konstantinovna of Russia and a great-great-granddaughter of Emperor Nicholas I of Russia. Her mother was a granddaughter of Princess Alice, second daughter of Queen Victoria.