The Duchess of Montpensier


The Count of ÉvreuxThe Countess of Évreux


Princess Béatrice


The Duke of OrléansThe Duchess of Orléans


The Dowager Countess of La Marche


The Countess of Schönborn-Buchheim


Princess Hélène, Countess of Limburg Stirum


The Dowager Duchess of Calabria


The Dowager Duchess of Württemberg


Princess Claude, Mrs. Gandolfi


Princess Chantal, Baroness of Sambucy de Sorgue


Prince Jean Carl Pierre Marie d'Orléans, Count of Paris (born 19 May 1965) is the current head of the House of Orléans. Jean is the senior male descendant by primogeniture in the male-line of Louis Philippe I, King of the French, and thus according to the Orléanists the legitimate claimant to the defunct throne of France as Jean IV. Jean is the second son of Henri, Count of Paris (1933–2019) and his former wife Duchess Marie-Thérèse of Württemberg (born 1934). Biography

Early life and education

Jean d'Orléans was born on 19 May 1965 in Boulogne-Billancourt, the son of Henri of Orleans and Maria Theresa of Württemberg. He received as godfather, his maternal uncle, Carl of Württemberg, and as godmother, his paternal aunt, Princess Chantal of Orleans. Jean completed his national service as an officer, first taking four months of classes at the Saumur Cavalry School. Jean is multilingual, speaking French, English, and German. First engagement

Prince Jean was due to marry Duchess Tatjana of Oldenburg (b. However, the wedding was cancelled at the last moment because of a dispute over religious denomination: Jean's father, Henri, feared the Orléans claim to the throne would be compromised if there were to be a Protestant heir. Second engagement and marriage

On 29 November 2008, Henri, then Count of Paris, announced the engagement of Jean, the then Duke of Vendôme, to Maria Magdalena Philomena Juliana Johanna de Tornos y Steinhart, born in Vienna on 19 June 1977. Lawsuit

In 2021, Jean filed a lawsuit against the Saint-Louis foundation, demanding €1 million in damages and the return of five properties, including the Château d'Amboise. In 1886, the château was bequeathed to the Institute of France by Jean's ancestor Henri d’Orléans, with the caveat that the property would never be altered by the institute. The Saint-Louis foundation was later founded by Jean's grandfather, Henri VI, Count of Paris, in 1974. Jean's lawsuit alleges that the Institute violated their contract to never alter the property, after they announced plans to transform the Pavillon d’Enghien into a €760-a-night luxury hotel, containing a spa and gastronomic restaurant. Jean had previously lived in the château from 2001 to September 2021 rent-free, but was forcefully evicted by the institute after they began to demand he pay rent, which Jean viewed as a violation of their contract. Family

Jean and his wife Philomena have six children: 


Politics

Jean believes that the people of France are "monarchist at heart" and argues that they long for a non-partisan figurehead. Jean has also expressed his opposition to same-sex marriage, having participated in the La Manif pour tous protests, as well as abortion. In May 2019, Jean met with French President Emmanuel Macron, Brigitte Macron, and Italian President Sergio Mattarella in his then-home in the Château d'Amboise. Following the death of his father, it was initially thought that Prince Jean would not assume the title of Count of Paris for several months after his father's death, and possibly not for as much as one year. Honours

National

Dynastic

Ancestry

Jean is a direct male-line descendant of Louis Philippe I, the last French king, who in turn was a descendant of Philippe I, Duke of Orléans, the younger brother of Louis XIV. Jean is also descended from Charles X, brother of Louis XVI; and the Bourbons of Spain, the Two Sicilies and Parma.