Prince Richard of Hesse (Richard Wilhelm Leopold; 14 May 1901 – 11 February 1969) was a German prince and politician. Early life

Prince Richard and his twin brother Christoph were born on 14 May 1901 in Frankfurt am Main, in Prussian Hesse as the fifth son Prince Frederick Charles of Hesse and his wife Princess Margaret of Prussia. Career and later life

The First World War and the fall of the imperial regime

Too young to be mobilized when the First World War broke out, Richard and Prince Christoph of Hesse-Kassel spent most of the conflict in Kronberg, where they were educated at the Reform Realgymnasium. Closely linked to the former Kaiser Wilhelm II, whose sister was Princess Margaret, the Hesse-Kassel were then attacked by the revolutionaries. From a sentimental point of view, Richard fell in love with Princess Sophie of Greece and Denmark, met around 1927. However, she fell in love with Richard's twin brother Prince Christoph of Hesse-Kassel, and it is the latter that she married, in 1930. Subsequently, Richard became a general (Obergruppenführer) in the Nationalsozialistisches Kraftfahrkorps (NSKK), a special unit of the SA corps, and obtained leadership of the Motorgruppe Hessen in 1935. The Second World War and its consequences

Prince Richard enlisted in the German Army shortly after the outbreak of the Second World War. At the same time, his older brother Philippe and his sister-in-law Mafalda of Italy were arrested by the Hitler regime while his twin brother, Prince Christoph of Hesse-Kassel, died in a plane crash. Meanwhile, the jewels of the House of Hesse-Kassel were stolen by American officers in 1946 and only 10% of the stolen objects were finally returned to their rightful owners, in 1951. Later years

After the Second World War, Richard assisted his brother Prince Wolfgang of Hesse for a while in the management of the Hessische Hausstiftung. Subsequently, he was appointed to the traffic surveillance of the state of Hesse. In the same years, Richard of Hesse-Kassel joined the spiritual movement of “Moral Rearmament”, founded by the Lutheran pastor Frank Buchman. Prince Richard died in 1969.