The Custodian of the Crown  Prince Radu


Princess Elena 
Princess Irina 
Princess Sophie 
Princess Maria 


Princess Maria of Romania (born 13 July 1964) is the fifth and youngest daughter of King Michael I and Queen Anne of Romania. Since 2015 Maria has lived in Romania and carried out a public role on behalf of the Romanian royal family. Early life

Maria was born on 13 July 1964 at Copenhagen University Hospital Gentofte in Gentofte, Copenhagen, Denmark as the youngest of five daughters of King Michael I and Queen Anne. Michael was informed by telephone that he'd become a father for the fifth time. Queen Marie, her paternal great-grandmother, was her namesake. During the Romanian Revolution of 1989, she, along with the rest of the royal family, worked to help the victims of those affected. When the situation in Romania eventually calmed down she left her public relations career and moved to New Mexico where she worked in private consulting until she moved to Romania in 2015. Activities in Romania

Maria visited Romania with her parents and other members of the family in 1997, and from this point onwards began visiting the country regularly for Christmas or family events such as her parents' 60th Wedding Anniversary and King Michael's 90th Birthday celebrations. This was followed by a dinner at the Palace attended by the Prime Minister of Romania (Victor Ponta) and other guests. On 21 April 2015 it was announced by the Romanian cosmetic company Farmec that Maria is an official ambassador of the company, where she will participate in projects to promote products created in the research lab of the company, as well as social responsibility activities undertaken by Farmec. In January 2015 it was announced that Maria would move to Romania permanently to take on activities in support of the royal family, and she was present in the public commemorations in Bucharest of 25 years since the royal family's return later the same month. During her father's illnesses, Maria and her elder sisters took turns to be with him at his home in Switzerland and it was during her stay that King Michael died. The wedding celebration was held at the Greek Orthodox Holy Trinity Cathedral in New York, and was attended by the Romanian royal family, the parents of Kazimierz, the newly married Crown Prince and Crown Princess of Greece. King Michael I served as the couple's koumbaros (the best man who, during a Greek Orthodox wedding, exchanges the crowns over the couple’s heads). On 12 January 2009, Princess Maria of Romania was booked in Santa Fe County, New Mexico, on the charge of "failure to appear." Although divorced from her husband since 2003, she was booked under the name "Marie Mystkowski." The princess was released the same day on a $200.00 bond.