Princess Margarita of Greece and Denmark (Greek: Μαργαρίτα; 18 April 1905 – 24 April 1981) was a Greek and Danish princess by birth and Princess of Hohenlohe-Langenburg by marriage. An elder sister of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh (husband of Queen Elizabeth II), she was, for a time, linked to the Nazi regime. The eldest daughter of Prince Andrew of Greece and Denmark and Princess Alice of Battenberg, Margarita spent a happy childhood between Athens and Corfu. During their exile, Margarita and her family depended on the generosity of their foreign relatives, in particular Princess George of Greece and Denmark (who offered them accommodation in Saint-Cloud) and Lady Louis Mountbatten (who supported them financially). Shortly after, in 1931, Margarita married Prince Gottfried of Hohenlohe-Langenburg. The couple then moved to Weikersheim Castle, where they raised four sons (Princes Kraft, Georg Andreas, Rupprecht and Albrecht) and a daughter (Princess Beatrix). Though preserved from Soviets, who caused the death of several of their cousins, the couple were ostracized by the British royal family at the time of the marriage of Prince Philip, Margarita's only brother, to Princess Elizabeth of the United Kingdom in 1947. Over the years, the couple were reintegrated into the life of the European elite, as illustrated by their invitation and presence at the coronation of Elizabeth II in 1953, and the princess's presence at the wedding of Juan Carlos, Prince of Asturias, and Princess Sophia of Greece and Denmark in 1962. The princess died in 1981 and her body was buried in the Hohenlohe-Langenburg family mausoleum. Margarita was the paternal aunt of the Prince of Wales, who later became King Charles III. Biography

Childhood

In Greece and abroad

The eldest daughter of Prince Andrew of Greece and Denmark and Princess Alice of Battenberg, Margarita was born at the Royal Palace in Athens on 18 April 1905. Margarita's early childhood was marked by the instability that the Kingdom of Greece experienced at the beginning of the twentieth century. Tired of attacks from the press and the opposition, Andrew and Alice found refuge in travel and made many stays outside the borders of their home country. With their daughters, they stayed in the United Kingdom, Germany, Malta and Russia, where they reunited with their numerous relatives including Edward VII of the United Kingdom, Ernest Louis, Grand Duke of Hesse, Alexandra Feodorovna, Prince and Princess Louis of Battenberg (Alice's parents), etc. In 1909, the Goudi coup occurred, a military putsch organized against the government of King George I of Greece, Margarita's grandfather. Shortly after this event, Prince Andrew and his brothers were forced to resign from the army. Concerned about the political situation of their country, Andrew and Alice once again found refuge abroad and stayed in the United Kingdom, France and Hesse. After considering a life in exile for a while, the couple returned to live in Greece, where their third daughter was born. The Balkan Wars and the First World War

Between 1912 and 1913, Greece engaged in the Balkan Wars, which put the country in opposition to the Ottoman Empire and to Bulgaria. Called to join the army again, Prince Andrew served under Crown Prince Constantine while Princess Alice worked as a nurse for wounded soldiers. Greece came out of the Balkan Wars with an expanded territory, but the conflict also led to the demise of George I, who was assassinated in March 1913. In his will, the sovereign bequeathed the Corfiote palace of Mon Repos to Andrew. After years of living in close proximity to the monarch, in the palaces of Athens and Tatoi, Andrew and his family therefore finally had their own residence. When peace returned, Andrew, Alice and their daughters left Greece in August 1913. Returning to Greece on 17 November 1913, the family was then retained in the country by Alice's fourth pregnancy and, above all, by the outbreak of the First World War. With Greece having proclaimed its neutrality, this new conflict initially hardly affected Margarita and her relatives. Stationed in Thessaloniki with his garrison, Andrew was thus confronted with the occupation of the city by the Allies in October 1915. Shortly after, in December, the routed Serbian army found refuge in Corfu, leading Alice and her daughters to abandon Mon Repos for the capital. Exile in Switzerland

In June 1917, King Constantine I was finally deposed and driven out of Greece by the Allies, who replaced him on the throne by his second son, the young Alexander. In the months that followed, she reconnected, moreover, with her maternal grandparents, whom the war forced to abandon the name of Battenberg for that of Mountbatten. Young adulthood

Brief return to Greece

On 2 October 1920, King Alexander, cousin of Margarita, was bitten by a domestic monkey during a walk in Tatoi. The death of the sovereign caused a violent institutional crisis in Greece. Prince Andrew was received triumphantly in Athens on 23 November 1920, and his wife and four daughters joined him a few days later. At the same time, Princess Alice found out that she was pregnant again. The joy that surrounded this birth, however, was obscured by the absence of Prince Andrew, who joined the Greek forces in Asia Minor during the Occupation of Smyrna. In March 1921, the princesses attended in Athens the wedding of their cousin Helen to Crown Prince Carol of Romania. However, the military defeat of Greece against Turkey and the political unrest that it caused disrupted the life of Margarita and her family. A month later, Prince Andrew was arrested before being tried by a military tribunal, which declared him responsible for the defeat of the Sakarya. After a brief stop in Corfu, the prince and his relatives hurriedly left Greece aboard HMS Calypso in early December 1922. Settled in a house adjoining that of Princess Marie Bonaparte, the family depended for seven years on her generosity, and two other aunts of Margarita: first Princess Anastasia and then Edwina, Countess Mountbatten of Burma. However, the young girls' lack of fortune and their life in exile meant that they hardly had any suitors, which was a matter of concern to their mother Alice. During the summer of 1926, Margarita met Prince François-Ferdinand d'Isembourg-Birstein, eldest son of Prince François-Joseph d'Isembourg-Birstein, during a stay in Tarasp with her great-uncle Ernest Louis, Grand Duke of Hesse. This did not prevent them from rejoicing for their aunt Louise when she was asked by Gustaf Adolf, Crown Prince of Sweden, to marry him in June 1923. Alice's confinement

Margarita, Theodora and Philip spent the summer of 1928 in Romania. Invited by Princess Helen, whose son Michael I was the same age as Philip, the two young women and their brother stayed for several weeks in Sinaia. At the time, Prince Nicholas of Romania was still single and Helen would like to see him marry one of her relatives, but her plans for her brother-in-law to marry one of her cousins came to nothing. A few months after this trip, Alice allegedly began to suffer from psychological problems. Prince Andrew finally made the decision to place his wife in a sanatorium, with the agreement of his mother-in-law, the Dowager Marchioness of Milford Haven. During his family's stay in Darmstadt, Germany, in April 1930, he sent Alice to a psychiatric hospital located in Kreuzlingen, Switzerland. Sophie married Prince Christoph of Hesse in December 1930, followed by Cecilie who married Georg Donatus, Hereditary Grand Duke of Hesse in February 1931. Settling in Germany and stays abroad

Family life and adherence to Nazism

In 1930, Margarita was 25 when she met Gottfried ("Friedel"), hereditary prince of Hohenlohe-Langenburg, who like her descended from Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom. The occasion was a large family reunion, at which Margarita's mother Alice was not present. Among the many guests were the Dowager Queen Marie of Romania and Grand Duchess Victoria Feodorovna of Russia (aunts of the groom) as well as Prince George of Greece and Denmark and Louise, Crown Princess of Sweden (uncle and aunt of the bride). After a stillbirth in 1933, Margarita gave birth to three children: Kraft (1935–2004), Beatrix (1936–1997), and Georg Andreas (1938–2021). However, Alice was angry with those close to her for having her placed in an asylum and, once released from there in 1933, she made known her desire to stay away from her family. When she was not taking care of those close to her, Margarita was involved in charitable works, which soon earned her the admiration of the inhabitants of the former principality of Hohenlohe-Langenburg. In spite of the testimonies of the Prince and the Princess of Hohenlohe-Langenburg, who assured the good morality of their friend in front of the press and in court, Gloria Morgan Vanderbilt lost the lawsuit. Travel to Greece

While Germany sank into dictatorship from 1933, the Hellenic Republic was overthrown by General Kondylis in October 1935. At the beginning of 1936, the banishment sentence issued in 1922 against Margarita's father Prince Andrew was lifted, which allowed him to stay in his country again. Estranged from her husband since her confinement, Princess Alice made the choice to return and live in Athens, where she settled in November 1938. In the meantime, Margarita also returned to Greece with Gottfried on the occasion of the marriage of Crown Prince Paul to Princess Frederica of Hanover in January 1938. While her husband and brothers-in-law Prince Christoph of Hesse and Berthold, Margrave of Baden, joined the German ranks, her brother Philip fought in the British Royal Navy. The invasion and occupation of France by Germany also block Prince Andrew on the French Riviera and contacting him became very difficult. As for Princess Alice, she refused to leave Greece at the time of invasion and spent most of the conflict in Athens helping refugees and hiding Jews, though she managed to pay a few visits to her daughters in 1940, 1942, and 1944. According to the Spanish biographer Ricardo Mateos Sainz de Medrano, the Prince of Hohenlohe-Langenburg was wounded during the Battle of Amiens and he spent the remainder of the conflict with his family in Langenburg. In April 1942, her mother-in-law, the Dowager Princess of Hohenlohe-Langenburg, died in Schwäbisch Hall after a long illness. A little over a year later, in October 1943, Prince Christoph, husband Margarita's sister Sophie, was killed in a plane crash while flying over the Apennine Mountains. Finally, in December 1944, her father Prince Andrew died in Monaco without having been able to see his children again. Post-war years

The defeat of Germany and its occupation by the Allies brought new upheavals in the life of the former German princely families, several of whom (such as Hermine Reuss of Greiz, Joachim Ernst, Duke of Anhalt, or Georg, Prince of Saxe-Meiningen) perished in hands of the Soviets. After peace was restored, the revelation of the war crimes of the Wehrmacht and their role in the Holocaust—brought to light during the Nuremberg trials—had serious repercussions on the relationship between the Hohenlohe-Langenburgs and their foreign relatives. Despite her own Germanic origins, Princess Alice of Battenberg thus developed a deep disgust for the German people and refused, until 1949, to return to stay in her daughters' country. For his part, Prince Philip (officially renamed Philip Mountbatten in 1947) found himself unable to invite his sisters on the occasion of his marriage to Princess Elizabeth of the United Kingdom because of anti-German sentiment prevailing in Great Britain after the war. Invited by the Duke and Duchess of Brunswick, they celebrated the union of their brother in the company of their cousin Princess Elizabeth of Greece and Denmark and Prince Louis and Princess Margaret of Hesse and by Rhine. A few days later, the Greek princesses received a visit from the Queen of the Hellenes (who came to bring them a letter from their mother Princess Alice describing the wedding in detail) and the Duchess of Kent. Return to normal life

Reintegration into royal circles

In March 1948, Margarita and her three elder children were invited to Athens by Princess Alice, who offered them the trip thanks to the pension that the Countess Mountbatten of Burma continued to pay her. In the years that followed, the Hohenlohe-Langenburgs made several other stays in Greece. In 1962, the Princess attended the wedding of Princess Sophia of Greece and Denmark and Juan Carlos, Prince of Asturias. The Greek royal family was not the only royal house to show its desire to reconnect with the Hohenlohe-Langenburgs. A few months later, the princess was chosen to be one of the godmothers of her niece, Princess Anne. Satisfied not to have been sidelined once again, the Princess of Hohenlohe-Langenburg nonetheless noted with sadness the anguish of her brother Philip, who considered with apprehension his new status as prince consort. There they found various members of Gottfried's relatives: Princess Beatrice of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha and her husband Infante Alfonso, Duke of Galliera (maternal aunt and uncle of the prince), Princess Alexandra of Hohenlohe-Langenburg (sister of the prince), as well as Prince Alfonso of Hohenlohe-Langenburg and his wife Ira von Fürstenberg (distant cousins of the prince). Life in Langenburg

In December 1950, Prince Ernest II, Margarita's father-in-law, died and Gottfried succeeded him as head of the House of Hohenlohe. The prince also sought to develop tourism in the former principality of Hohenlohe-Langenburg. At the end of the 1950s, however, Gottfried's state of health deteriorated and he died on 11 May 1960, making Prince Kraft, his eldest son, the new head of the house of Hohenlohe. In 1961, the princess thus attended the wedding of Prince Edward, Duke of Kent, and Katharine Worsley. The damage to the building was considerable and forced Prince Kraft to sell Weikersheim Castle in 1967 to finance the renovation work. This did not prevent the Hohenlohe-Langenburgs from receiving Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip in their castle during their official trip to West Germany in 1965. In 1965, Prince Kraft married Princess Charlotte von Croÿ. Then, in 1969, Prince Georg Andreas married Princess Luise von Schönburg-Waldenburg. The engagement of Princess Beatrix to her nephew Maximilian, Margrave of Baden, son of Princess Theodora, on the other hand broke off in 1961 and the princess remained unmarried all her life. Devastated by the loss of her younger sister, who was only one year younger than her, Margarita also lost her mother Alice two months later. Archives

Margarita's personal papers (including family correspondence and photographs) are preserved in the Hohenlohe-Langenburg family archive (Nachlass Fürstin Margarita, HZAN La 148), which is in the Hohenlohe Central Archive (Hohenlohe-Zentralarchiv Neuenstein) in Neuenstein Castle in the town of Neuenstein, Baden-Württemberg, Germany.