Prince William of Gloucester (William Henry Andrew Frederick; 18 December 1941 – 28 August 1972) was a member of the British royal family. The elder son of Prince Henry, Duke of Gloucester, and Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester, he was a grandson of George V, nephew of Edward VIII and George VI, and first cousin of Elizabeth II. Early life

William was born on 18 December 1941 at the Lady Carnarvon Nursing Home in Hadley Common, Hertfordshire, the eldest son of Prince Henry, Duke of Gloucester, and Alice, Duchess of Gloucester. His father was the third son of King George V and Queen Mary, and his mother was the third daughter of the 7th Duke of Buccleuch and Lady Margaret Bridgeman. His godparents were King George VI (his paternal uncle), Queen Mary (his paternal grandmother), Princess Helena Victoria (his paternal first cousin twice-removed), Lady Margaret Hawkins (his maternal aunt), Major Lord William Montagu Douglas Scott (his maternal uncle) and John Vereker, 6th Viscount Gort, who was unable to attend. This prompted George VI to write to his sister-in-law, assuring her that, should anything happen to his brother, he would become Prince William's guardian. In 1947, William served as a page boy at the wedding of his cousin Princess Elizabeth to Philip, Duke of Edinburgh. The other page boy was Prince Michael of Kent. He was the second member of the British royal family to work in the civil service or diplomatic service (the first was his uncle, Prince George, Duke of Kent, in the 1920s). By 1970, the health of his father, the Duke of Gloucester, had deteriorated following further strokes. The relationship was further explored in the 2015 Channel 4 TV documentary, The Other Prince William. Princess Margaret, while not encouraging William, did sympathise with him in this regard and advised him to "wait a bit" and to "see how everything looks" once he returned to Britain. Although aware of the theory of the royal family's history of porphyria then being advanced by Ida Macalpine and Richard Hunter, Bellringer stated he "tried not to let it influence him...with all the symptoms, I was left with little option but to diagnose the Prince's condition as porphyria." He was later examined by haematologists at Addenbrooke's Hospital in Cambridge, and also by a Professor Ishihara in Tokyo; both of whom also concluded he was suffering from variegate porphyria, by then in remission. The comprehensive school in Oundle, which he opened in 1971, was renamed Prince William School in his memory. William was the heir apparent of his father's peerages, Duke of Gloucester, Earl of Ulster, and Baron Culloden. Upon his death, his younger brother Prince Richard became heir apparent, and succeeded to these peerages in 1974. Honours and arms

Honours

Arms

For his 21st birthday, in 1962, Prince William was granted the use of the Royal Arms, differenced with a label argent of five points, the outer pair and central point bearing lions gules, the inner pair crosses gules.