Queen Margrethe II


Prince Joachim of Denmark, Count of Monpezat, RE, SKmd (.mw-parser-output .IPA-label-small{font-size:85%}.mw-parser-output .references .IPA-label-small,.mw-parser-output .infobox .IPA-label-small,.mw-parser-output .navbox .IPA-label-small{font-size:100%}Danish pronunciation: ; Joachim Holger Waldemar Christian; born 7 June 1969) is a member of the Danish royal family. The younger son of Queen Margrethe II, he is fifth in the line of succession to the Danish throne, following the four children of his elder brother King Frederik X. His godparents were his maternal aunt, Princess Benedikte of Denmark; his paternal uncle, Jean Baptiste de Laborde de Monpezat; his mother's first cousin, Princess Christina of Sweden; and King Harald V (then Crown Prince of Norway). Schackenborg

In 1993, Joachim took over the estate of Schackenborg Castle in the town of Møgeltønder, in Southern Jutland, having been granted the estate in the will of Count Hans Schack in 1978. Joachim and his first wife, now the Countess of Frederiksborg, received 13 million DKK collected by the people of Denmark as a national gift, reserved for restoration of the estate. The couple was divorced in 2005, whereupon Countess Alexandra moved with their two sons to Copenhagen. Between 1989 and 1990, he served as platoon commander in the 3rd tank squadron/1st Battalion (3/I/PLR) of the Prince's Life Regiment. Between 1996 and 2004, he served as squadron commander of 3rd tank squadron/2nd Battalion (3/II/PLR) also in the Prince's Life Regiment. During the summer of 2019, Joachim, Princess Marie and their two children moved to Paris, France, while the Prince had been admitted to the highest-ranking military educational program at École Militaire by invitation from the French Minister of Defense. As general officer and Denmark's military attaché to France

Earlier in June 2020, Minister of Defence Trine Bramsen promoted Joachim to Brigadier General due to his new acquired educational merits at École Militaire. He was subsequently named Military Attaché at the Royal Danish Embassy in Paris, France, by the Danish Ministry of Defense, a position he was expected to hold for at least three years while maintaining his patronages and royal engagements in Denmark when possible. Denmark's military attaché to the United States

In March 2023, it was announced that Joachim, Marie and their two younger children would be moving to Washington, D.C. The couple had two sons, Count Nikolai and Count Felix. Alexandra received the title of Countess of Frederiksborg, and was permitted to retain the courtesy title of princess pending remarriage. She continues to live in Denmark. The wedding date marked the 73rd anniversary of the wedding of Joachim's grandparents, King Frederik IX and Queen Ingrid of Denmark. The couple have two children, Count Henrik and Countess Athena. From 1 January 2023 all four of his children are known as His or Her Excellency Count/Countess of Monpezat. In the six-part series that he also co-produced, Joachim investigates the ideas and events that shaped Denmark's history. Titles, styles, honours and arms

Titles and styles

Military ranks

Honours

National

Orders and appointments

Medals and decorations

Foreign

He has been honoured with:


Additional information

The Dansk Rugby Union (DRU) website names Prince Joachim as the patron of the DRU.