Princess Viktoria of Prussia (Friederike Amalia Wilhelmine Viktoria; 12 April 1866 – 13 November 1929) was the second daughter of Frederick III, German Emperor and his wife Victoria, Princess Royal, eldest daughter of Queen Victoria. Born a member of the Prussian royal house of Hohenzollern, she became Princess Adolf of Schaumburg-Lippe following her first marriage in 1890. Adolf died during the First World War, two years before the German Empire came to an end. Early life

Birth and baptism

Viktoria was born on 12 April 1866 in the New Palace in Potsdam, to Crown Prince Frederick William and Crown Princess Victoria of Prussia. Her father was the only son of King Wilhelm I of Prussia and Princess Augusta of Saxe-Weimar; her mother, Victoria ("Vicky"), was the eldest child of Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom and her consort, Prince Albert. Viktoria was baptised in the New Palace as Friederike Amalia Wilhelmine Viktoria on 24 May 1866, the birthday of her grandmother Queen Victoria, who was also one of her godparents. Other sponsors included her grandfather the King of Prussia, and Princess Marie of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen. Following the birth of Princess Viktoria, Queen Victoria wrote a letter to her daughter Crown Princess Victoria, mentioning that she was happy with her granddaughter being named after her:


"I am much pleased & touched that the dear, new baby (& long may she remain the Baby!) is to be called after me", Victoria wrote Vicky, "as I cannot deny that it pained me very much that 4 children were born without one being called after either of your parents. In 1871, Viktoria's grandfather Wilhelm I became German Emperor, and her parents became Crown Prince and Princess of a unified German Empire. Still, the Crown Princely couple raised their children away from the Berlin court, which disliked Frederick William and Victoria and their liberal beliefs. Her elder siblings, paternal grandparents Emperor Wilhelm I and Empress Augusta, and German chancellor Otto von Bismarck were opposed to the match. Furthermore, Alexander was born of a morganatic marriage, and his position as Prince of Bulgaria was unstable; he had more to gain than Viktoria through marriage to a daughter of the future German emperor. Depression and changing life


As Viktoria was losing hope of marrying Sandro, her grandfather Emperor Wilhelm I and her father Crown Prince Frederick William were both ailing, and her sister Sophie was preparing to move to Athens in order to marry the Crown Prince of Greece. The Emperor died on 9 March 1888, and Frederick William and Victoria became the new emperor and empress. Frederick, however, was dying of throat cancer, and reigned for only 99 days before succumbing to his illness on 15 June. Viktoria's eldest brother, now Emperor Wilhelm II, despised his parents and, though Frederick had requested in his will that Wilhelm allow Viktoria to marry Sandro, the new emperor instead wrote to Sandro to definitively end the couple's courtship. Further suitors

Following the collapse of Viktoria's plans to marry Sandro, her mother (now known as "Empress Frederick") and grandmother, Queen Victoria, continued to look for possible suitors, and enlisted the help of the Duchess of Edinburgh and Princess of Leiningen. First marriage and adult life

Engagement and wedding

In June 1890, Viktoria, with her mother and sister Margaret, visited their cousin Marie of Nassau, the widowed Princess of Wied. Furthermore, Adolf held only the style of Serene Highness, while Viktoria was a Royal Highness and the daughter of an Emperor. They were forced to cut this final visit short in order to return to Germany for medical care, as Viktoria had suffered an early miscarriage. Princess Adolf of Schaumburg-Lippe

Adolf purchased from a cloth manufacturer a neoclassical palace that would become the Palais Schaumburg, in Bonn. Later life

Widowhood and First World War

In 1914, Germany entered the First World War. Despite being the sister of the Kaiser of Germany, Viktoria was very sympathetic to the British cause. The war years threw Viktoria's life into chaos: Adolf died in July 1916, after nearly thirty years of marriage; in 1917, Viktoria's brother-in-law the King of the Hellenes, who married her sister Queen Sophia of Greece in 1890, was deposed; and in 1918, her brother Wilhelm II was forced to abdicate and the German nobles and royals legally lost their titles under the new Weimar Republic. Without asking permission from the former Emperor Wilhelm, Viktoria renounced her titles and married Zoubkoff first at the town hall in Bonn, then in a Greek Orthodox ceremony at which none of her family was in attendance. Alexander's financial troubles, combined with his public misconduct, led to his deportation from Germany not long after. The restaurant advertised with a sign that read: "The Emperor's brother-in-law is serving you here". That same year Viktoria caused another scandal by filing for divorce from Zoubkoff after less than two years of marriage, on the grounds that his behaviour had resulted in his expulsion from Germany, he was unable to maintain her, and that "conjugal relations did not exist". Archives

Viktoria's letters to her sister Margaret are preserved in the Archive of the House of Hesse, which is kept in Fasanerie Palace in Eichenzell, Germany.