Prince Peter of Greece and Denmark (Greek: Πέτρος; 3 December 1908 –  15 October 1980) was a Greek prince, soldier and anthropologist specialising in Tibetan culture and polyandry. Born in Paris and high in the line of succession to the Greek throne, Prince Peter was deemed to have forfeited his succession rights by marrying a twice-divorced Russian commoner, Irina Aleksandrovna Ovtchinnikova. The Prince returned to Asia several more times for his research of Tibetan culture. Early life

A member of the House of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg, Prince Peter was the elder child and only son of Prince George of Greece and Denmark and the wealthy author and psychoanalyst Princess Marie Bonaparte. His father was the second son of King George I of Greece and his mother the only daughter of the French botanist Prince Roland Bonaparte and Marie-Félix Blanc. Peter was born in Paris and spent his childhood in France, and did not set foot in Greece between 1912 and 1935 due to the First World War and the later proclamation of the Second Hellenic Republic. During that time, he came to know Denmark, the kingdom from which the Greek royal family originated. He joined the Royal Guards of Denmark in 1932 for basic military service, and was commissioned as a second lieutenant in 1934. He spent summers at Bernstorff Palace, then owned by his paternal granduncle, Prince Valdemar of Denmark. As customary, Princess George took no part in her son's upbringing, and when he reached adolescence, only the counsels of the psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud helped them suppress their incestuous feelings for each other. Greek restoration

Following the restoration of his cousin, King George II, Prince Peter travelled to the Kingdom to take part in the ceremonial reinterment of the remains of his uncle, King Constantine I, and those of the queens Olga and Sophia, his grandmother and aunt respectively. In the 1930s, a possible marriage between Prince Peter and Princess Frederica of Hanover may have been discussed, but she eventually married Prince Paul. He proceeded to travel through Greece with his parents and visited Crete in April 1937. Voyage to Asia and marriage

In 1935, Prince Peter met and started a relationship with Irina Aleksandrovna Ovtchinnikova, a four years older married Russian émigré with an ex-husband, Jehan de Monléon, Marquis de Monléon. Accompanied by Ovtchinnikova and a student of Malinowski, Prince Peter embarked on a voyage to Asia in September 1937. Aware of his family's disapproval of the relationship, but also possibly wishing to take advantage of the turmoil created by the recently declared Second World War, the Prince did not bother to inform either the Greek royal court or his parents about the marriage. Prince George, affronted by his son's decision not to ask him or the King for permission to marry, disowned Peter and henceforward refused contact with him. Despite her own disappointment, however, Princess George remained in touch with her son and continued to regularly send him money. Second World War

Prince Peter and Ovtchinnikova returned to Europe in November 1939. Prince George refused to see him. Peter also met with his sister and her newborn daughter, Princess Tatiana Radziwill. Peter declined this offer to move to Greece and join his country's infantry in the wake of Greco-Italian War. King George II believed her to be a plotter, and was also wary of his cousin. Germany invaded Greece on 6 April 1941. King George and Prince Paul therefore moved to London, while the majority of the family found refuge in South Africa. "The Russian", it was rumoured, wished Greece to be Orthodox but Communist and with Peter as king. Prince Peter's chief task in the Middle East was to reorganise the remnants of the Greek royal army and prepare them to participate in the war alongside the Allies of World War II. Aftermath of the war

The royal family could not return to Greece immediately after the war ended due to a civil war between the Communists and the Conservatives. Prince Peter was aware that King George, if allowed to return, would never allow him to move to Greece along with his wife. On 1 September 1946, a referendum confirmed George II's position. The King, however, died unexpectedly on 1 April the next year and the Prince was demobilised. Peter hoped that Paul, George II's successor, would recognise his marriage to Ovtchinnikova. King Paul agreed but only if Prince Peter officially recognised that the marriage deprived him of his dynastic rights, something the Prince had always refused to do. Peter turned down the offer and Paul prohibited him from returning to Greece. Prince Peter and Irene Ovtchinnikova thus decided to move from Egypt to Denmark. The Prince wished to avoid any possible dispute with the Greek government and thus prudently avoided expressing his opinion about the Greek politics. A few days later, he was relieved when he received a letter from Prince Axel of Denmark, son of Prince Valdemar and first cousin of Peter's father, who informed him that the expedition should still take place. Tibetan studies

First sojourn

Prince Peter and Ovtchinnikova left the United States in January 1949, travelling from California to Colombo, the capital of Ceylon. Peter gathered anthropometric data on 3,284 persons, analysed 198 blood samples, bought clothes, jewellery, books (such as the Tengyur and Kangyur), and various other objects now found at the National Museum of Denmark and the Royal Library. One man did not understand why the Prince bothered to wear a shirt, given that he already had hair. In mid-1953, the Prince once again left the Himalayas to head a commemorative expedition to Afghanistan in honour of Haslund-Christensen, but returned to the Himalayas within six weeks. The government of India, on the other hand, feared the wrath of its powerful neighbour and thus proceeded to harass the Prince and Ovtchinnikova to push them out of the country. Princess George also tried to intercede on behalf of her son and daughter-in-law, but failed to meet Nehru during his visit to London in June 1956. During the seven years that Prince Peter spent with his wife in the Himalayas, he was able to collect "...a rich collection of artefacts and books, still and moving photography, sound recordings, ethnographic information as well as an astoundingly large set of physical anthropology data."


Final decades

Upon their return to Europe, Prince Peter and Ovtchinnikova settled in the United Kingdom, where the Prince resumed his studies at the London School of Economics. However, the Parliament of Greece modified the Constitution to replace the original agnatic primogeniture with male-preference cognatic primogeniture, thereby introducing a number of female dynasts and their descendants into the line of succession. King Constantine II, still unmarried and childless, thus officially recognised his only unmarried sister, Princess Irene, as heir presumptive (excluding the older sister, Princess Sophia, who was due to become Queen of Spain). Shortly after the King's marriage to their cousin, Princess Anne-Marie of Denmark, the uninvited Prince Peter called a press conference in Athens and openly questioned the legality of the constitutional amendment. King Constantine II and Queen Anne-Marie's first child, Princess Alexia, was born in 1965 and designated as the new heir presumptive, but Peter refused to recognise that either. Following the rupture between King Constantine and Prime Minister Georgios Papandreou the same year, the Prince openly criticised the King's conduct and suggested himself as an alternative to Constantine II. After the monarchy was abolished, Prince Peter decided to liquidate his possessions in Greece, most notably his residence in Glyfada. Prince Peter continued to support the Tibetan cause. In 1967 he, "...was instrumental in procuring vocational training for young Tibetans in Denmark."


Death and burial

He was surprised by an offer from the Chinese government to visit the Tibet Autonomous Region in the late 1970s. A memorial mass for Prince Peter was held at St Sophia's Cathedral, London, on 22 October. He compromised by agreeing that the tomb inscription would describe her as "Irina, spouse of Prince Peter, née Alexandrovna Ovtchinnikova" rather than as a Greek princess. The Greek government, however, refused to allow his burial in Greece.