Prince George William of Hanover and Cumberland (Georg Wilhelm Ernst August Friedrich Axel Prinz von Hannover; 25 March 1915 – 8 January 2006) was the second-eldest son of Ernest Augustus, Duke of Brunswick, and his wife Princess Victoria Louise of Prussia, the only daughter of Wilhelm II, German Emperor, and Augusta Victoria of Schleswig-Holstein. George William's wife was a sister of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, and his children are thus first cousins of King Charles III. He held the title of Prince of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, granted ad personam to the children of the then-Duke of Brunswick by George V's letters patent of 1914, which remained unrevoked. Life

George William was christened on 10 May 1915 in Brunswick. The prince's godparents included Maria Christina of Austria, Prince Axel of Denmark, and Princess Olga of Hanover and Cumberland who held the infant prince over the baptismal font. His wife, Sophie, sister of Prince Philip of Greece and Denmark, later Duke of Edinburgh, consort of Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom, died in 2001. Marriage

On 23 April 1946 in Salem, Baden-Württemberg, Germany, Prince George William married his third cousin Princess Sophie of Greece and Denmark, daughter of Prince Andrew of Greece and Denmark and Princess Alice of Battenberg, and the widow of Prince Christoph of Hesse. After consultations with the Foreign Office, Home Office and King George VI's private secretary, Sir Alan Lascelles, a ciphered telegram dated 18 April 1946 and crafted by Sir Albert Napier, permanent secretary to the Lord Chancellor, was transmitted from the British Foreign Office to the Foreign Adviser to the British Commander in Chief at Berlin:


"The Duke of Brunswick has formally applied to The King by letter of March 22nd for the consent of His Majesty under the Act 12 Geo. 11 to the marriage of his son Prince George William with Princess Sophia Dowager Princess of Hesse. Please convey to the Duke an informal intimation that in view of the fact that a state of war still exists between Great Britain and Germany, His Majesty is advised that the case is not one in which it is practicable for His consent to be given in the manner contemplated by the Act."

They had three children: Welf (1947–1981), Georg (born 1949) and Friederike (born 1954). Ancestry

George William was a descendant of Victoria of the United Kingdom and Albert, Prince Consort through their eldest daughter Victoria, Princess Royal, the wife of Frederick III, German Emperor.