Prince Andrew of Greece and Denmark (Greek: Ανδρέας, romanized: Andréas; 2 February  1882 – 3 December 1944) was the seventh child and fourth son of King George I and Queen Olga of Greece. He was a grandson of King Christian IX of Denmark and the father of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh. He was a prince of Greece and Denmark, both by virtue of his patrilineal descent. On their return a few years later, Andrew saw service as Major General in the Greco-Turkish War (1919–1922), but the war went badly for Greece, and Andrew was blamed, in part, for the loss of Greek territory. By 1930, Andrew was estranged from his wife, Princess Alice of Battenberg. His only son, Philip, served in the British navy during World War II, while all four of his daughters were married to Germans, three of whom had Nazi connections. He was the fourth son of George I of Greece and Olga Constantinovna of Russia. A member of the House of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg, Andrew held the title of prince in both Greece and Denmark, as his father was a younger son of Christian IX of Denmark. In addition to his native Greek, Andrew learnt Danish, German, French, English, and Russian. Marriage

In 1902, Andrew met Princess Alice of Battenberg during his stay in London on the occasion of the coronation of Edward VII, who was his uncle-by-marriage and her grand-uncle. Princess Alice was a daughter of Prince Louis of Battenberg and Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine, King Edward's niece. The following day two religious wedding services were performed: one Lutheran in the Evangelical Castle Church, and another Greek Orthodox in the Russian Chapel on the Mathildenhöhe. Prince and Princess Andrew had five children, all of whom later had children of their own. Early career

In 1909, the political situation in Greece led to a coup d'état, as the Athens government refused to support the Cretan parliament, which had called for the union of Crete (still nominally part of the Ottoman Empire) with the Greek mainland. In 1914, Andrew (like many European princes) held honorary military posts in both the German and Russian empires, as well as Prussian, Russian, Danish and Italian knighthoods. Exile from Greece

For three years, Constantine's second son, Alexander, was king of Greece, until his early death from an infection due to a monkey bite. The family settled at Saint-Cloud on the outskirts of Paris, in a small house lent to them by Andrew's wealthy sister-in-law, Princess George of Greece. His marriage to Alice was effectively over, and after her recovery and release, she returned to Greece. Andrew returned to Greece for a brief visit that May. The following year, his pregnant daughter Cecilie, his son-in-law and two of his grandchildren were killed in an air accident at Ostend; he travelled to London to meet up with his sixteen-year-old son Prince Philip and they went together to Darmstadt where he met Alice for the first time in six years at the funeral. During World War II, he found himself essentially trapped in Vichy France, while his son, Prince Philip, fought on the side of the British. Andrew's three surviving sons-in-law fought on the German side: Prince Christoph of Hesse was a member of the Nazi Party and the Waffen-SS; Berthold, Margrave of Baden, was invalided out of the Wehrmacht in 1940 after an injury in France; Prince Gottfried of Hohenlohe-Langenburg served on the Eastern Front and was dismissed after the 20 July plot. He was at first buried in the Russian Orthodox church in Nice, but in 1946 his remains were transferred, by the Greek cruiser Averof, to the royal cemetery at Tatoi Palace, near Athens. Prince Philip and then-private secretary, Mike Parker, travelled to Monte Carlo to collect items belonging to his father from Andrée de La Bigne; among these items: a signet ring which the Prince wore from then onwards, an ivory shaving brush he took to using, and some clothes that he had altered to fit him.