Prince Edward, Duke of Edinburgh (Edward Antony Richard Louis; born 10 March 1964), is a member of the British royal family. He is the youngest child of Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, and the youngest sibling of King Charles III. His charity work focuses on the arts, athletics, and the development of the Duke of Edinburgh's Award, which centres on fitness, wellbeing and community service. Edward was given the title of Earl of Wessex prior to marrying Sophie Rhys-Jones in 1999. They have two children: Louise and James. Edward's mother conferred him the additional title of Earl of Forfar in 2019. On Edward's 59th birthday in 2023, his brother Charles III granted him the title Duke of Edinburgh as a life peerage, a dukedom previously held by their father, who died in 2021, then briefly by Charles. Early life and education

Edward was born at 8:20 pm on 10 March 1964 at Buckingham Palace, London, the third son and the fourth and youngest child of Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh. Media reports suggested that Prince Philip, then  Captain General Royal Marines, was displeased, but Edward later stated that his father had not put undue pressure on him to reconsider and had supported his decision. Ardent's productions were better received in the United States, and a documentary Edward made in 1996 about his great-uncle Edward VIII (the Duke of Windsor) sold well internationally. In September 2001, an Ardent two‑man film crew allegedly invaded the privacy of Edward's nephew, Prince William, while he was studying at the University of St Andrews, in breach of industry guidelines concerning the privacy of members of the royal family. They met again in 1993 at a promotional shoot for the Prince Edward Summer Challenge, a charity event, and began their relationship soon afterwards. On his wedding day, Edward was created Earl of Wessex, with the subsidiary title of Viscount Severn (alluding to the Welsh roots of the Countess's family), breaking with the tradition that sons of the sovereign were created royal dukes. The couple have two children: Lady Louise Mountbatten-Windsor, born prematurely on 8 November 2003 following a sudden placental abruption; and James Mountbatten-Windsor (then Viscount Severn, now Earl of Wessex), born on 17 December 2007. Since 2023, Edward's children have been styled as the children of a duke rather than as Prince or Princess and do not use the style of Royal Highness. Activities

The Earl and Countess of Wessex established their foundation, the Bagshot Park Charity, later renamed the Wessex Youth Trust, in 1999, with a focus on helping, supporting, and advancing registered charities that provide opportunities specifically for children and young people. Twenty years after its inception, the Wessex Youth Trust changed its name to the Earl and Countess of Wessex Charitable Trust, managed by the private office of the Earl and Countess of Wessex and Forfar. In July 2023, the trust's remaining funds were transferred to the Edinburgh Trust No. Edward's patronages include the British Paralympic Association, the International Real Tennis Professionals Association, the Commonwealth Games Federation, BadmintonScotland, the Tennis and Rackets Association, the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra and Chorus, the London Mozart Players, Haddo House Choral and Operatic Society, Northern Ballet, the Edinburgh International Festival, the Royal Birmingham Conservatoire, the Production Guild, and National Youth Theatre. The Earl of Wessex assumed many duties from his father, Prince Philip, as Philip reduced his commitments before retiring from royal duties. He has also taken over his father's role in the Duke of Edinburgh's Award (DofE) scheme, attending Gold Award ceremonies around the world. In September 2007, the Earl visited Israel in his capacity as Chairman of the International Council of the Duke of Edinburgh's Award to attend a number of events organised by the Israel Youth Award program, an affiliate of the Duke of Edinburgh's Award. Edward later became chair of trustees of the Duke of Edinburgh's International Award in 2015, and was named patron of the Duke of Edinburgh's Award in 2023. In 2018, Edward, as patron of the Tennis and Rackets Association, played on all 50 real tennis courts around the world and raised over £2 million for the Duke of Edinburgh's Award scheme. In June 2011, Edward visited Baltimore to meet students and staff of the Living Classrooms Foundation and encourage their participation in the Duke of Edinburgh's Award's programme. In December 2011, the Earl and Countess of Wessex visited troops in Afghanistan. In February and March 2012, the Earl and Countess visited the Caribbean as part of the Queen's Diamond Jubilee. The Queen appointed the Earl of Wessex as Lord High Commissioner to the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland for 2014. In May 2016, the Earl visited Ghana, where he joined President Mahama in presenting young people with the Head of State Awards for their participation in the Duke of Edinburgh's International Award Scheme. In September 2016, Edward travelled to Chile as part of the Duke of Edinburgh's Award's diamond anniversary and visited projects run by the British and Commonwealth Fire and Rescue Company and Chilean-British Culture University, of which he is an honorary member and patron respectively. The Earl and Countess of Wessex represented the Queen at the 50th anniversary celebrations of Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah's accession to the throne of Brunei in October 2017. In April 2018, the Earl visited Australia to attend the XXI Commonwealth Games and to support fundraising events for participants in the Duke of Edinburgh Award challenges. In July 2019, the Earl and Countess of Wessex visited Forfar on their first official visit to the royal burgh since the Queen granted Edward the additional title Earl of Forfar in March 2019. The Earl was presented with 'Earl of Forfar' tartan, designed by Forfar's Strathmore Woollen Company to mark their new titles. In February 2022, Edward was appointed president of the Royal Windsor Horse Show, a position previously held by his father Prince Philip. The following month, he visited Kenya to oversee the progress of the Duke of Edinburgh's International Award in the country. In April 2022, the Earl and Countess of Wessex and Forfar toured Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and Antigua and Barbuda to mark the Queen's Platinum Jubilee. In 2022, and in recognition of his role as patron of the Production Guild, the Earl of Wessex Award was created as part of the Guild's inaugural Talent Showcase to recognise UK film and television organisations that had developed "a successful way of inspiring local talent or skills, widening access or being more inclusive."


After he was created Duke of Edinburgh on his 59th birthday, Edward and Sophie visited Edinburgh to meet members of the Ukrainian and Eastern European communities in the city, including those displaced following the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Edward became patron of the Duke of Edinburgh's Award upon being raised to the dukedom. In 2024, he served as Lord High Commissioner to the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland, and was succeeded in the role the following year by Lady Elish Angiolini. Titles, styles, honours and arms

Titles and styles

Until his marriage, Edward was known as "His Royal Highness The Prince Edward". On 19 June 1999, he became "His Royal Highness The Earl of Wessex". At the time of his marriage, Buckingham Palace announced the intention that Edward would eventually be created Duke of Edinburgh, a title then held by his father, Prince Philip, once it had merged in the Crown following the death of both his parents. On 10 March 2019, his 55th birthday, Edward was granted the additional title of Earl of Forfar for use in Scotland. On his 59th birthday, 10 March 2023, Edward was created Duke of Edinburgh, thus becoming "His Royal Highness The Duke of Edinburgh". In 1994, the Independent Royalist Party of Estonia, which aspired to establish a monarchy in the country, sent a letter to Queen Elizabeth II requesting permission to crown Edward as King of Estonia.