Queen Margrethe II


Princess Isabella of Denmark, Countess of Monpezat, RE (Isabella Henrietta Ingrid Margrethe; born 21 April 2007) is a member of the Danish royal family. She is the second child and elder daughter of King Frederik X and Queen Mary. She is the fourth grandchild and oldest granddaughter of Queen Margrethe II and Prince Henrik. She was the first girl born into the Danish royal family since the birth of her great-aunt, Queen Anne-Marie of Greece, in 1946. Early life and education

Isabella was born on 21 April 2007 at 4:02 pm CET at Rigshospitalet, the Copenhagen University Hospital, in Copenhagen, to then Crown Prince Frederik and Crown Princess Mary. She was baptised at the royal baptismal font which has been used for the baptism of royal children in Denmark since 1671, and wore the royal christening gown which was made for her great-great-grandfather, King Christian X, in 1870. Her godparents were her father's first cousin, Princess Alexia of Greece and Denmark; Queen Mathilde of Belgium (then Duchess of Brabant), Nadine Johnston, Christian Buchwald, Peter Heering and Marie Louise Skeel. The stay was eventually cut short and the siblings returned home in March due to the intensification of the COVID-19 situation in Denmark. In August 2023, Isabella started upper secondary school at Øregård Gymnasium – the same school her father, Frederik, and uncle, Joachim, previously attended. Previously, Queen Margrethe II performed voluntary service with the Women's Flying Corps, a branch of the Danish Home Guard, between 1958 and 1970, and Queen Mary has also trained with the Home Guard, but neither have undergone formal training with the armed forces. Youths between the age of 17 and 24 from across the kingdom were eligible to apply for tickets to the performance which was also attended by her parents and three siblings; her grandmother, Queen Margrethe II; her cousins, Count Nikolai and Count Felix of Monpezat; her great-aunts, Princess Benedikte of Denmark and Queen Anne-Marie of Greece; as well as the Prince and Princess of Sayn-Wittgenstein-Berleburg. Titles, styles, and honours

Isabella was originally styled "Her Royal Highness Princess Isabella of Denmark". Since 29 April 2008, she has been styled 
"Her Royal Highness Princess Isabella of Denmark, Countess of Monpezat".