Prince Henry, Duke of Gloucester (Henry William Frederick Albert; 31 March 1900 – 10 June 1974), was a member of the British royal family. He was the third son of King George V and Queen Mary, and was a younger brother of kings Edward VIII and George VI. In 1935, also under parental pressure, he married Lady Alice Montagu Douglas Scott, with whom he had two sons, princes William and Richard. The post had originally been offered to his younger brother the Duke of Kent, who died in an air crash. Upon his death, he was succeeded as the Duke of Gloucester by his only living son, Richard. Henry was the last surviving son of King George V and Queen Mary. His father was the Duke of York (later King George V), the only surviving son of the Prince and Princess of Wales (later King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra). His mother was the Duchess of York (later Queen Mary), the only daughter of the Duke and Duchess of Teck. George wrote to Henry's tutor, Henry Peter Hansell, that he should be treated differently from his more robust elder brothers, noting, "You must remember that he is rather fragile and must be treated differently to his two elder brothers who are more robust". On 6 May 1910, George succeeded to the throne as George V, and Henry became third in line to the throne. During the First World War, Crown Prince Leopold of Belgium, later Leopold III, was a member of his house, Mr Lubbock's. He was brevetted to major on 2 August 1934, and, during his father's Silver Jubilee the following May, was appointed Colonel-in-Chief of the Gloucestershire Regiment. Following Edward's abdication and the accession of Albert as George VI, Henry was effectively retired from active duty and received a ceremonial promotion to major‑general on 1 January 1937, skipping three ranks. Duke of Gloucester

On 31 March 1928, his father created him Duke of Gloucester, Earl of Ulster, and Baron Culloden, three titles that linked him with England, Northern Ireland, and Scotland. The affair, widely known in London society, shocked the Queen, much to the amusement of the Prince of Wales, who remarked that "for once, Queen Mary's blue-eyed boy was in trouble instead of himself". In 1934, George V appointed him a Knight of St Patrick, Ireland's chivalric order. After his tour of Australia and New Zealand, and under pressure from his parents, Henry decided it was time to settle and proposed to Lady Alice Montagu Douglas Scott, sister of one of his closest friends, Lord William Montagu Douglas Scott. The wedding had originally been planned for Westminster Abbey, but was moved to the Private Chapel at Buckingham Palace following the death of Alice's father, the Duke of Buccleuch, on 19 October 1935. The price for the house and four tenanted farms was £37,500; in her memoirs, Alice described this as "the greater part of the money left to Prince Henry by the King." However, records of the financial arrangements following the abdication of Edward VIII state that Henry received a legacy of £750,000 from his father’s private fortune. Their brother Albert ascended as King George VI. Although Henry was third in line to the throne, after his two nieces Princesses Elizabeth and Margaret, he became the first adult in line, meaning he would act as regent if anything happened to the King before Elizabeth reached the age of 18 on 21 April 1944. Because of this, Henry could not leave the United Kingdom at the same time as the King, and he and his younger brother, Prince George, Duke of Kent, had to increase their royal engagements considerably to support the new monarch. Edward VIII, who became Duke of Windsor after abdicating, later recalled that Henry reacted least to the news of his abdication. On one occasion, Queen Mary wrote to Alice suggesting that, if they were planning to visit, Henry should bring his own supply, "as we have not got much left, and it is so expensive". or the occasional blasphemous oath."


King George VI had great affection for Henry. On 14 May, he and his brother‑in‑law, Lord William Scott, drove from the Hotel Univers in Arras into Belgium to meet the King at a secret location. The King wrote to his sister‑in‑law that he would act as guardian to the newborn William should anything happen to Henry. After Henry's younger brother, the Duke of Kent, was killed in a plane crash in Scotland in August 1942, it was decided that Henry would not be sent on any further missions that might place him at similar risk. Governor-General of Australia

In late 1944, Henry was unexpectedly appointed Governor-General of Australia following the death in 1942 of his younger brother, the Duke of Kent, who had previously been offered the post. He was recalled to the United Kingdom to act as Counsellor of State on behalf of the King during the visit by George VI and Princesses Elizabeth and Margaret to South Africa. His last public appearance was in 1967 at the unveiling of Queen Mary's plaque at Marlborough House, where he appeared frail and noticeably older than the Duke of Windsor. By 1972, his health had deteriorated to the extent that he was unable to attend the Duke of Windsor's funeral in May or the wedding of his younger son, Richard, in July. In August, his elder son, William, was killed in a plane crash; Henry's condition was so poor that Alice hesitated to tell him. He was the last surviving son of King George V and Queen Mary, and the last living knight of the Order of St Patrick. His only living son, Richard, inherited the title of Duke of Gloucester. Alice received permission from Queen Elizabeth II to be styled Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester, to distinguish her from Richard's wife. Honours and arms

Honours

Military

Arms

In 1921, Prince Henry was granted a personal coat of arms, being the royal arms, differenced by a label argent of three points, the centre bearing a lion rampant gules, and the outer points crosses gules.