Prince Amedeo of Savoy-Aosta, 5th Duke of Aosta (Amedeo Umberto Costantino Giorgio Paolo Elena Maria Fiorenzo Zvonimir di Savoia; 27 September 1943 – 1 June 2021) was a claimant to the headship of the House of Savoy, the family which ruled Italy from 1861 to 1946. Until 7 July 2006, Amedeo was styled Duke of Aosta; on that date he declared himself Duke of Savoy, a title that was disputed between him and his third cousin, Vittorio Emanuele, Prince of Naples, only son of King Umberto II of Italy. Early life

Amedeo was born at Villa della Cisterna in Florence, the only child of Prince Aimone, Duke of Aosta, formerly designated king of Croatia as Tomislav II, and of Princess Irene of Greece and Denmark through whom he was a great-great-grandson of Queen Victoria. When Amedeo was only four years old, his father died in exile in Buenos Aires, and he succeeded him as Duke of Aosta, Prince della Cisterna e Belriguardo, Marchese di Voghera, and Count di Ponderano. He was an Honorary Companion of the Pennsylvania Commandery of the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States, assigned insignia number 21015, as a great-grandson of Prince Philippe, Count of Paris. Marriages and family

1st marriage and descendants

On 22 July 1964, at the Igreja Paroquial De São Pedro in Sintra, Portugal, Amedeo married his second cousin, Princess Claude of Orléans (born 11 December 1943). She was the ninth child and fifth daughter of Henri, comte de Paris, Orléanist claimant to the French throne, and of Princess Isabelle of Orléans-Braganza. He was involved in various agricultural activities, including the production of wine marketed under the name Vini Savoia Aosta. Dynastic activities

Amedeo was long viewed by Italian royalists as a likely claimant to the throne if Umberto's own son, Vittorio Emanuele, Prince of Naples, failed to live up to monarchist expectations. On 7 July 2006, Amedeo declared himself to be the Head of the House of Savoy and Duke of Savoy, claiming that in 1971, Vittorio Emanuele had lost his dynastic rights when he married without previously obtaining the permission of Umberto II, authorization which had been required under monarchical law. In 2009, Vittorio Emanuele and his son, Emanuele Filiberto, Prince of Venice, sought judicial intervention to forbid Amedeo's use of the surname di Savoia. In February 2010, the court of Arezzo ruled that the Amedeo and his son Aimone must pay damages totalling 50,000 euros to their cousins and cease using the surname di Savoia instead of di Savoia-Aosta. Amedeo's claim received the support of Vittorio Emanuele's sister, Princess Maria Gabriella of Savoy. Although many monarchists transferred their allegiance to Amedeo at some point after King Umberto's death, Amedeo was criticised by other Italian royalists who continue to support Prince Vittorio Emanuele. The Unione Monarchica Italiana published in its newsletter, Monarchia Nuova, on 12 February 1987 that the Prince of Naples' marriage to Marina Doria violated the decree of Victor Amadeus III, issued 13 September 1780, regulating the marriages of princes of the blood royal, compelling the Unione to recognise Amedeo as rightful head of the royal house—although at that time Aosta had put forth no public dynastic claim. Death

Prince Amedeo died on 1 June 2021, at the age of 77, in Arezzo, Italy, from cardiac arrest after undergoing surgery on 27 May.