Princess Xenia Georgievna of Russia (22 August 1903 – 17 September 1965) was the younger daughter of Grand Duke George Mihailovich of Russia and Princess Maria Georgievna of Greece and Denmark. She is known for recognizing Anna Anderson as Grand Duchess Anastasia. Youth

Xenia and her older sister Princess Nina Georgievna, who was born in 1901, left Russia in 1914 to spend the war years in England with their mother. In 1919, her father, his brother Grand Duke Nicholas Mikhailovich, and their cousins Grand Duke Paul Alexandrovich and Grand Duke Dmitry Konstantinovich, were executed by a Bolshevik firing squad in St. This solution would be simple, so it seemed to me."


As children, Xenia and her sister Nina had played frequently with the two youngest daughters of Tsar Nicholas II, Grand Duchesses Maria Nikolaevna and Anastasia Nikolaevna, as well as the youngest child and only boy, Tsarevitch Alexei. With it she radiated a natural grandeur and I was impressed on the spot."


Xenia recognized Anna Anderson as the Grand Duchess Anastasia at once, asserting that Anna was herself at all times, never giving the slightest impression of playing a part. Prince Christopher of Greece described the stay:


She stayed with my niece, ... Then her treatment of the Grand Duchess Xenia, sister of the last Tsar, led to a quarrel with William Leeds, who turned her out of the house. Pierre Gilliard, tutor for the five children of Tsar Nicholas II from 1905 to 1918, pointed out that Princess Xenia had last seen her second cousin when Xenia was 10 and Anastasia was 12. Prince Dmitri, son of Grand Duchess Xenia, wrote about what Princess Xenia had stated,


Xenia's irresponsible statement should be somehow refuted ... We know she left Russia in 1914 aged 10 years old, I also know that Nina (her sister) and Xenia never saw Uncle Nicky's family very often, and when they did see them that was when they were very young. and the stepson of Xenia's maternal uncle Prince Christopher of Greece and Denmark, through his marriage to William’s mother, the former Nonie Stewart Leeds. Death

Princess Xenia Georgievna died on 17 September 1965, aged 62, survived by her second husband and by her daughter, Nancy Leeds Wynkoop, and by granddaughter Alexandra.