William, Prince of Orange (Willem Nicolaas Alexander Frederik Karel Hendrik; 4 September 1840 – 11 June 1879), was heir apparent to the Dutch throne as the eldest son of King William III from 17 March 1849 until his death. Early life

Prince William was the eldest son of King William III of the Netherlands and his first wife, Princess Sophie of Württemberg. He was also seventeenth in the line of succession to the British throne, his claim being through his mother Sophie's great-grandmother Princess Augusta of Great Britain. On 7 October 1840, only a month after his birth, his great-grandfather, the reigning King William I of the Netherlands, abdicated the throne due to disappointment over the recent Treaty of London, which recognized the independence of Belgium (previously provinces of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands), and the intention of marrying a Roman Catholic and Belgian noblewoman, Henrietta d'Oultremont. In 1849, after the death of his grandfather King William II of the Netherlands, he became Prince of Orange as heir apparent. Failed marriage attempts

After attempts to marry Prince William off to Princess Alice of the United Kingdom, the second daughter of Queen Victoria or Grand Duchess Maria Alexandrovna of Russia failed, the prince fell in love with the 19-year-old Countess Mathilde van Limburg-Stirum in 1873. The relationship between the prince and his parents became very problematic, as his parents (who rarely agreed on anything) refused William's wish to accept Mathilde as his bride in 1874. Also a rumour circulated that Mathilde was an illegitimate daughter of King William III and so William would potentially be marrying his own half-sister. The 33-year-old William wanted to marry, if necessary, without the consent of his parents (this would have cost him his position in the line of succession). Death and aftermath

Heavily disillusioned with his situation in the Netherlands, Prince William then went into exile in Paris, where he threw himself into a life of sex, drinking and gambling. Prince William died at the age of 38 in his apartment in the Rue Auber, near the Paris Opera from a combination of typhus, liver complaints and total exhaustion. Honours

Ancestry

Footnotes

2 gave up the title "Prince of the Netherlands, but still held the title "Prince of Orange-Nassau"
3 title granted by Royal Decree to descendants of Princess Irene