William, Prince of Wales (William Arthur Philip Louis; born 21 June 1982), is the heir apparent to the British throne. He is the elder son of King Charles III and Diana, Princess of Wales. They have three children: George, Charlotte, and Louis. He is patron of multiple charitable and military organisations, including the Tusk Trust, Centrepoint, The Passage, Wales Air Ambulance, and London's Air Ambulance Charity. The following day, he was made Prince of Wales. He was the first child of Charles, Prince of Wales (later King Charles III), and his first wife, Diana, Princess of Wales. Buckingham Palace announced his name – William Arthur Philip Louis – on 28 June. William was the first child born to a Prince and Princess of Wales since Prince John was born to Prince George and Princess Mary (later King George V and Queen Mary) in July 1905. His younger brother, Prince Harry, was born in September 1984. He and Harry travelled to Canada on an official visit with their parents in 1991, and again with Charles in 1998. The following morning, Charles informed William and Harry of their mother's death. His grandfather, Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, told him: "If you don't walk, I think you'll regret it later. At the funeral, William and Harry walked alongside their father, grandfather, and maternal uncle, Charles Spencer, 9th Earl Spencer, behind the funeral cortège from Kensington Palace to Westminster Abbey. As "Lieutenant Wales" – a name derived from his father's then title, Prince of Wales – he followed his brother into the Blues and Royals in December that year as a second lieutenant, after which he spent five months training for the post at Bovington Camp in Dorset. This made him the first member of the British royal family since Henry VII to live in Wales. In February 2023, he became patron of the Wales Air Ambulance charity. In June 2010, the couple moved into a cottage on the Bodorgan Estate in Anglesey, Wales, where they lived until 2014. William and Catherine have three children: Prince George, born in July 2013; Princess Charlotte, born in May 2015; and Prince Louis, born in April 2018; all three were born at St Mary's Hospital in London. In April 2014, he and Catherine undertook a royal tour of New Zealand and Australia, accompanied by their son George. In December that year, the couple embarked on a tour of England, Scotland, and Wales via the British Royal Train "to pay tribute to the inspiring work" of communities and charities in 2020. Prince of Wales

Queen Elizabeth II died on 8 September 2022, and William's father succeeded as King Charles III. William, now heir apparent, was created Prince of Wales by his father on 9 September. Controversy surrounding the title became a topic of public debate in Wales. William and Catherine visited Anglesey and Swansea on 27 September 2022, marking their first visit to Wales since becoming Prince and Princess of Wales. On 6 November that year, William attended the 2025 United Nations Climate Change Conference in Belém in place of Charles III; The Daily Telegraph described his address as "his highest-profile speech to date". That December, William spent two weeks in North Wales with Mountain Rescue England and Wales (MREW). In July 2007, William and Harry organised the Concert for Diana in memory of their mother, benefitting the charities and patronages of Diana, William, and Harry. BAFTA has since established the Prince William BAFTA Bursary to support junior creatives in the UK with costs needed to progress in film, television, or games. In March 2011, he and Catherine set up a gift fund through The Foundation of Prince William and Prince Harry to allow well‑wishers to donate to charities supporting the armed forces, children, the elderly, art, sport, and conservation in lieu of wedding gifts. The foundation was renamed The Royal Foundation of The Prince and Princess of Wales in September 2022. He also appeared in an ITV documentary, Prince William: A Planet For Us All, discussing environmental issues. That same year, the WRU's decision to name the Prince William Cup drew criticism from those who believed it would have been more appropriate to name it after Ray Gravell. In May 2020, he appeared in the BBC One Documentary Football, Prince William and Our Mental Health, part of a campaign encouraging men to discuss mental‑health issues using football as a shared medium. In November 2022, William was criticised by Welsh football supporters and Welsh actor Michael Sheen for holding the Prince of Wales title while maintaining affiliations with the England national football team, particularly after he presented jerseys to the squad ahead of the 2022 FIFA World Cup, in which both Wales and England were placed in the same Group B. Privacy and the media

The death of Diana, Princess of Wales, while being chased by the paparazzi in 1997, has shaped William and Catherine's cautious approach to the media. In October 2014, Catherine and William issued a legal warning to a freelance photographer for "harassing and following" their son George and his nanny. In August 2015, Kensington Palace released a letter describing the media's "dangerous" attempts to photograph George and Charlotte. Titles, styles, and honours

Titles and styles

William has been a British prince since birth and was known as "His Royal Highness Prince William of Wales" until April 2011. As the eldest son of the monarch, William automatically became Duke of Cornwall, Duke of Rothesay, Earl of Carrick, Baron of Renfrew, Lord of the Isles, and Prince and Great Steward of Scotland upon his father's accession on 8 September 2022. On 9 September, Charles announced William's creation as Prince of Wales, the traditional title for the male heir apparent to the British monarch. William has since been known as "His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales", except in Scotland, where he is styled "His Royal Highness the Duke of Rothesay" instead. Through his mother, William descends from the Earls Spencer – a cadet branch of the Spencer family descended from the earls of Sunderland (the senior branch are now also dukes of Marlborough); from the Barons Fermoy; and, more distantly from Henry FitzRoy, 1st Duke of Grafton, and Charles Lennox, 1st Duke of Richmond – two illegitimate sons of King Charles II. As king, William would be the first monarch since the death of Anne in 1714 to descend undisputedly from Charles I, and the first to descend from Charles II.