Elizabeth Angela Marguerite Bowes-Lyon (4 August 1900 – 30 March 2002) was Queen of the United Kingdom and the Dominions of the British Commonwealth from 11 December 1936 to 6 February 1952 as the wife of King George VI.
After her husband died, she was officially known as Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother to avoid confusion with her daughter Queen Elizabeth II.
Born into a family of British nobility, Elizabeth came to prominence in 1923 when she married Prince Albert, Duke of York, the second son of King George V and Queen Mary.
The couple and their daughters, Elizabeth and Margaret, embodied traditional ideas of family and public service.
As Duchess of York, Elizabeth undertook a variety of public engagements and became known for her consistently cheerful countenance.
In 1936, Elizabeth's husband unexpectedly ascended the throne as George VI when his older brother, Edward VIII, abdicated in order to marry American divorcée Wallis Simpson.
Elizabeth then became queen consort.
After the death of Queen Mary in 1953, Elizabeth was viewed as the matriarch of the British royal family.
Early life

Elizabeth Angela Marguerite Bowes-Lyon was born on 4 August 1900, the youngest daughter and the ninth of ten children of Claude Bowes-Lyon, Lord Glamis (later the 14th Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorne in the Peerage of Scotland), and his wife, Cecilia Cavendish-Bentinck.
Her mother was descended from British prime minister William Cavendish-Bentinck, 3rd Duke of Portland, and Governor-General of India Richard Wellesley, 1st Marquess Wellesley, who was the elder brother of another prime minister, Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington.
The location of Elizabeth's birth remains uncertain, but reputedly she was born either in her parents' Westminster home at Belgrave Mansions, Grosvenor Gardens, or in a horse-drawn ambulance on the way to a hospital.
Elizabeth spent much of her childhood at St Paul's Walden and at Glamis Castle, the Earl's ancestral home in Scotland.
On Elizabeth's 14th birthday, Britain declared war on Germany.
Glamis was turned into a convalescent home for wounded soldiers, which Elizabeth helped to run.
The first love of Elizabeth was considered to be Charles Gordon-Lennox, Lord Settrington, whose sister, Lady Doris, was a close friend of hers.
Upon his death, Elizabeth called him "my only true friend", writing: "I was not shy about him and he was so delightful.
Charlie was the only one I could talk to in a completely natural and simple way – he was dear to me, and I miss him very much".
Marriage

Prince Albert, Duke of York – "Bertie" to the family – was the second son of King George V and Queen Mary.
He initially proposed to Elizabeth in 1921, but she turned him down, being "afraid never, never again to be free to think, speak and act as I feel I really ought to".
When he declared he would marry no other, Queen Mary visited Glamis to see for herself the young woman who had won her son's love.
She became convinced that Elizabeth was "the one girl who could make Bertie happy", but refused to interfere.
At the same time, Elizabeth was courted by James Stuart, Albert's equerry, until he left the prince's service for a better-paid job in the American oil business.
In February 1922, Elizabeth was a bridesmaid at the wedding of Albert's sister, Princess Mary, to Viscount Lascelles.
Eventually in January 1923, Elizabeth agreed to marry Albert, despite her misgivings about royal life.
Albert's freedom in choosing Elizabeth, not a member of a royal family, though the daughter of a peer, was considered a gesture in favour of political modernisation; previously, princes were expected to marry princesses from other royal families.
Unexpectedly, Elizabeth laid her bouquet at the Tomb of the Unknown Warrior on her way into the abbey, in memory of her brother Fergus.
She was thereafter styled Her Royal Highness The Duchess of York.
Following a wedding breakfast at Buckingham Palace prepared by chef Gabriel Tschumi, Elizabeth and Albert honeymooned at Polesden Lacey, a manor house in Surrey owned by the wealthy socialite and friend Margaret Greville.
Duchess of York

After a successful royal visit to Northern Ireland in July 1924, the Labour government agreed that Albert and Elizabeth could tour East Africa from December 1924 to April 1925.
The Labour government was defeated by the Conservatives in a general election in November (which Elizabeth described as "marvellous" to her mother) and the Governor-General of Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, Sir Lee Stack, was assassinated three weeks later.
Albert had a stammer, which affected his ability to deliver speeches, and after October 1925, Elizabeth assisted in helping him through the therapy devised by Lionel Logue, an episode portrayed in the 2010 film The King's Speech.
In 1926, Elizabeth gave birth to their first child, Princess Elizabeth – known as "Lilibet" to the family – who would later become Queen Elizabeth II.
Albert and Elizabeth, without their child, travelled to Australia to open Parliament House in Canberra in 1927.
Their journey by sea took them via Jamaica, the Panama Canal and the Pacific; Elizabeth fretted constantly over her baby back in Britain, but their journey was a public relations success.
The couple's second daughter, Princess Margaret, was born at Glamis Castle in 1930.
Queen consort

On 20 January 1936, George V died and his eldest son, Edward, Prince of Wales, became King Edward VIII.
Elizabeth's husband, Albert, became heir presumptive.
Just months into Edward's reign, the King's decision to marry the American divorcée Wallis Simpson caused a constitutional crisis that resulted in his abdication.
Albert reluctantly became king of the United Kingdom and emperor of India on 11 December 1936 under the regnal name of George VI.
Elizabeth became queen and empress.
Their coronation took place in Westminster Abbey on 12 May 1937, the date previously scheduled for Edward VIII's coronation.
Elizabeth's crown was made of platinum and was set with the Koh-i-Noor diamond.
Edward married Wallis Simpson, and they became the Duke and Duchess of Windsor, but while Edward was a Royal Highness, George VI withheld the style from Wallis, a decision that Elizabeth supported.
Elizabeth was later quoted as referring to Wallis as "that woman", and Wallis referred to Elizabeth as "Cookie", because of her supposed resemblance to a fat Scots cook.
Claims that Elizabeth remained embittered towards Wallis were denied by her close friends; the Duke of Grafton wrote that she "never said anything nasty about the Duchess of Windsor, except to say she really hadn't got a clue what she was dealing with".
Overseas visits

In summer 1938, a state visit to France by the King and Queen was postponed for three weeks because of the death of Elizabeth's mother.
In two weeks, Norman Hartnell created an all-white trousseau for Elizabeth, who could not wear colours as she was still in mourning.
The French press praised the demeanour and charm of the royal couple during the delayed but successful visit, augmented by Hartnell's wardrobe.
After the Munich Agreement of 1938 appeared to forestall the advent of armed conflict, the British prime minister Neville Chamberlain was invited onto the balcony of Buckingham Palace with the King and Queen to receive acclamation from a crowd of well-wishers.
While broadly popular among the general public, Chamberlain's policy towards Hitler was the subject of some opposition in the House of Commons, which led historian John Grigg to describe George VI's behaviour in associating himself so prominently with a politician as "the most unconstitutional act by a British sovereign in the present century".
In May and June 1939, Elizabeth and her husband toured Canada from coast to coast and back, the first time a reigning monarch had toured Canada.
First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt said that Elizabeth was "perfect as a Queen, gracious, informed, saying the right thing & kind but a little self-consciously regal".
According to an often-told story, during one of the earliest of the royal couple's repeated encounters with the crowds, a Boer War veteran asked Elizabeth, "Are you Scots or are you English?"
Their reception by the Canadian and U.S. public was extremely enthusiastic, and largely dissipated any residual feeling that they were a lesser substitute for Edward VIII.
Elizabeth told Canadian prime minister William Lyon Mackenzie King, "that tour made us", and she returned to Canada frequently both on official tours and privately.
Second World War

During the Second World War, the royal couple became symbols of the fight against fascism.
Shortly after the declaration of war, The Queen's Book of the Red Cross was conceived.
Fifty authors and artists contributed to the book, which was fronted by Cecil Beaton's portrait of Elizabeth and was sold in aid of the Red Cross.
Elizabeth publicly refused to leave London or send the children to Canada, even during the Blitz, when the British Cabinet advised her to do so.
"


Elizabeth visited troops, hospitals, factories, and parts of Britain that were targeted by the German Luftwaffe, in particular the East End near London's docks.
When Buckingham Palace itself took several hits during the height of the bombing, Elizabeth said, "I'm glad we've been bombed.
"


Though the King and Queen spent the working day at Buckingham Palace, partly for security and family reasons they stayed at night at Windsor Castle about 20 miles (32 km) west of central London with their daughters.
During the "Phoney War" the Queen was given revolver training because of fears of imminent invasion.
French prime minister Édouard Daladier characterised Elizabeth as "an excessively ambitious young woman who would be ready to sacrifice every other country in the world so that she may remain Queen."
Although the King was initially suspicious of Churchill's character and motives, in due course the royal couple came to respect and admire him.
Elizabeth's political views were rarely disclosed, but a letter she wrote in 1947 described Attlee's "high hopes of a socialist heaven on earth" as fading and presumably describes those who voted for him as "poor people, so many half-educated and bemused.
Woodrow Wyatt thought her "much more pro-Conservative" than other members of the royal family, but she later told him, "I like the dear old Labour Party."
"


During the 1947 royal tour of South Africa, Elizabeth's serene public behaviour was broken, exceptionally, when she rose from the royal car to strike an admirer with her umbrella because she had mistaken his enthusiasm for hostility.
The 1948 royal tour of Australia and New Zealand was postponed because of the King's declining health.
In summer 1951, Elizabeth and her daughters fulfilled the King's public engagements in his place.
After a lung resection, he appeared to recover, but the delayed trip to Australia and New Zealand was altered so that Princess Elizabeth and her husband, the Duke of Edinburgh, went in the King and Queen's place in January 1952.
George VI died in his sleep on 6 February 1952 while Princess Elizabeth and the Duke of Edinburgh were in Kenya on a Commonwealth tour, and with George's death his daughter immediately became Queen Elizabeth II.
Queen mother

Widowhood

Shortly after George VI's death, Elizabeth began to be styled as Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother because the normal style for the widow of a king, "Queen Elizabeth", would have been too similar to the style of her elder daughter, Queen Elizabeth II.
Popularly, she became the "Queen Mother" or the "Queen Mum".
Eventually, she became just as busy as queen mother as she had been as queen consort.
In July 1953, she undertook her first overseas visit since the funeral when she visited the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland with Princess Margaret.
Upon her return to the region in 1957, Elizabeth was inaugurated as the college's president, and attended other events that were deliberately designed to be multi-racial.
During her daughter's extensive tour of the Commonwealth over 1953–54, Elizabeth acted as a counsellor of state and looked after her grandchildren, Charles and Anne.
Elizabeth oversaw the restoration of the remote Castle of Mey, on the north coast of Scotland, which she used to "get away from everything" for three weeks in August and ten days in October each year.
In February 1964, Elizabeth had an emergency appendectomy, which led to the postponement of a planned tour of Australia, New Zealand, and Fiji until 1966.
She recuperated during a Caribbean cruise aboard the royal yacht, Britannia.
During her widowhood, Elizabeth continued to travel extensively, including on over forty official visits overseas.
In 1982, Elizabeth was rushed to hospital when a fish bone became stuck in her throat, and had an operation to remove it.
Similar incidents occurred at Balmoral in August 1986, when she was hospitalised at Aberdeen Royal Infirmary
In 1987, Elizabeth was criticised when it emerged that two of her nieces, Nerissa and Katherine Bowes-Lyon, had been committed to a psychiatric hospital in Redhill, Surrey, in 1941 because they had severe learning disabilities.
However, Burke's Peerage had listed the sisters as dead, apparently because their mother, Fenella (Elizabeth's sister-in-law), "was 'extremely vague' when it came to filling in forms and might not have completed the paperwork for the family entry correctly".
Elizabeth said that the news of their institutionalisation came as a surprise to her.
Centenarian

In her later years, Elizabeth became known for her longevity.
Elizabeth's 100th birthday was celebrated in a number of ways: a parade, with contributions from Sir Norman Wisdom and Sir John Mills, celebrated highlights of her life; the Royal Bank of Scotland issued a commemorative £20 note with her image; and she attended a lunch at the Guildhall, London, at which George Carey, the Archbishop of Canterbury, accidentally attempted to drink her glass of wine.
On 1 August 2001, Elizabeth had a blood transfusion for anaemia after suffering from mild heat exhaustion, though she was well enough to make her traditional appearance outside Clarence House three days later to celebrate her 101st birthday.
Her final public engagements included planting a cross at the Field of Remembrance on 8 November 2001; a reception at the Guildhall, London, for the reformation of the 600 Squadron, Royal Auxiliary Air Force on 15 November; and attending the re-commissioning of HMS Ark Royal on 22 November.
In December 2001, aged 101, Elizabeth fractured her pelvis in a fall.
Just three days later, their second daughter, Princess Margaret, died.
On 13 February 2002, Elizabeth fell and cut her arm in her sitting room at Sandringham House; an ambulance and doctor were called, and the wound was dressed.
She was still determined to attend Margaret's funeral at St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, two days later on the Friday of that week, even though Queen Elizabeth II and the rest of the royal family were concerned about the journey the Queen Mother would face to get from Norfolk to Windsor; she was also rumoured to be hardly eating.
Nevertheless, she flew to Windsor by helicopter, and so that no photographs of her in a wheelchair (which she hated being seen in) could be taken—she insisted that she be shielded from the press—she travelled to the service in a people carrier with blacked-out windows, which had been previously used by Margaret.
On 5 March 2002, Elizabeth attended the luncheon of the annual lawn party of the Eton Beagles and watched the Cheltenham Races on television; however, her health began to deteriorate precipitously during her last weeks, after she retreated to Royal Lodge for the final time.
Death

Elizabeth died at 3:15 pm on 30 March 2002 at Royal Lodge, Windsor, aged 101.
Her daughter, Queen Elizabeth II, was by her side.
The Queen Mother had been suffering from a chest cold since Christmas 2001.
At 101 years and 238 days old she was the longest-living member of the British royal family at the time of her death, and the first member of the family to live past the age of 100.
Her surviving sister-in-law, Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester, exceeded that, dying at the age of 102 on 29 October 2004.
She was one of the longest-lived members of any royal family.
Elizabeth grew camellias in each of her gardens, and before her flag-draped coffin was taken from Windsor to lie in state at Westminster Hall, an arrangement of camellias from her own gardens was placed on top.
At one point, her four grandsons–Prince Charles, Prince Andrew, Prince Edward and Viscount Linley–mounted the guard as a mark of respect, an honour similar to the Vigil of the Princes at the lying in state of King George V.


On the day of Elizabeth's funeral, 9 April, the governor general of Canada, Adrienne Clarkson, issued a proclamation asking Canadians to honour Elizabeth's memory that day.
In Australia, Governor-General Peter Hollingworth read the lesson at a memorial service held in St Andrew's Cathedral, Sydney.
In London, more than a million people filled the area outside Westminster Abbey and along the 23-mile (37 km) route from central London to Elizabeth's final resting place in the King George VI Memorial Chapel beside her husband and younger daughter in St George's Chapel.
Legacy

Known for her personal and public charm, Elizabeth was one of the most popular members of the royal family, and helped to stabilise the popularity of the monarchy as a whole.
Elizabeth's critics included Kitty Kelley, who falsely alleged that she did not abide by the rationing regulations during the Second World War.
Claims that Elizabeth used racist slurs to refer to black people were strongly denied by Major Colin Burgess, the husband of Elizabeth Burgess, a mixed-race secretary who accused members of Prince Charles's household of racial abuse.
Elizabeth made no public comments on race, but according to Robert Rhodes James, in private she "abhorred racial discrimination" and decried apartheid as "dreadful".
In his official biography, William Shawcross portrays Elizabeth as a person whose indomitable optimism, zest for life, good manners, mischievous sense of humour, and interest in people and subjects of all kinds contributed to her exceptional popularity and to her longevity.
Sir Hugh Casson said Elizabeth was like "a wave breaking on a rock, because although she is sweet and pretty and charming, she also has a basic streak of toughness and tenacity. ...
The Queen Mother stopped and picked these up as though somebody had misplaced them.
Elizabeth was well known for her dry witticisms.
On hearing that Edwina Mountbatten was buried at sea, she said: "Dear Edwina, she always liked to make a splash."
"


After being advised by a Conservative minister in the 1970s not to employ homosexuals, Elizabeth observed that without them, "we'd have to go self-service".
Elizabeth's habits were parodied by the satirical 1980s television programme Spitting Image.
She was portrayed by Juliet Aubrey in Bertie and Elizabeth, Sylvia Syms in The Queen, Natalie Dormer in W.E., Olivia Colman in Hyde Park on Hudson, Victoria Hamilton (Seasons 1 and 2), Marion Bailey (Seasons 3 and 4) and Marcia Warren (Season 5 and 6) in The Crown and in The King's Speech by Helena Bonham Carter, who was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress and won a BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role for her portrayal.
The Cunard White Star Line's RMS Queen Elizabeth was named after her.
Supposedly, the liner started to slide into the water before Elizabeth could officially launch her, and acting sharply, she managed to smash a bottle of Australian red over the liner's bow just before it slid out of reach.
In 1954, Elizabeth sailed to New York on her namesake.
A statue of Elizabeth by sculptor Philip Jackson was unveiled in front of the George VI Memorial, off The Mall, London, on 24 February 2009, creating the King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Memorial.
In March 2011, Elizabeth's eclectic musical taste was revealed when details of her small record collection kept at the Castle of Mey were made public.
Eight years before her death, Elizabeth had reportedly placed two-thirds of her money (an estimated £19 million) into trusts, for the benefit of her great-grandchildren.
She left the bulk of her estate, estimated to be worth between £50 and £70 million, including paintings, Fabergé eggs, jewellery, and horses, to her surviving daughter, Queen Elizabeth II.
The most important pieces of art were transferred to the Royal Collection by Elizabeth II.
Following her death, 
Queen Elizabeth II successfully applied to the High Court so that details of her mother's will would be kept secret.
This brought criticism from Labour politicians and segments of the public, and Queen Elizabeth II eventually released the outlines of her mother's will.
Titles, honours and arms

Titles and styles

Elizabeth held numerous titles starting with her birth, as the daughter of an earl and through her marriage to the-then Duke of York, who later became King-Emperor.
She was the last person to be Empress of India, and was Queen Mother during widowhood.
Arms

Elizabeth's coat of arms was the royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom (in either the English or the Scottish version) impaled with the canting arms of her father, the Earl of Strathmore; the latter being: 1st and 4th quarters, Argent, a lion rampant Azure, armed and langued Gules, within a double tressure flory-counter-flory of the second (Lyon); 2nd and 3rd quarters, Ermine, three bows stringed paleways proper (Bowes).
