David Albert Charles Armstrong-Jones, 2nd Earl of Snowdon (born 3 November 1961), styled as Viscount Linley until 2017 and known professionally as David Linley, is a member of the British royal family, an English furniture maker, and honorary chairman of the auction house Christie's.
He is the only son of Antony Armstrong-Jones, 1st Earl of Snowdon and Princess Margaret, and through his mother a grandson of King George VI and first cousin of King Charles III.
When he was born, he was 5th in the line of succession to the British throne; as of 2025, he is 26th, and the highest who is not a descendant of Queen Elizabeth II, his aunt.
Early life and education

David Albert Charles Armstrong-Jones was born at 10:45 am on 3 November 1961, at Clarence House, London, the son of Princess Margaret and Antony Armstrong-Jones, 1st Earl of Snowdon.
His godparents were his aunt Queen Elizabeth II, Lady Elizabeth Cavendish, Patrick Plunket, 7th Baron Plunket, Lord Rupert Nevill, and Simon Phipps.
He has one full sister, Lady Sarah Chatto (née Armstrong-Jones), and two paternal half-sisters, Lady Frances von Hofmannsthal (née Armstrong-Jones) and Polly Fry.
Professional life

Linley opened a workshop in Dorking, where he designed and made furniture for three years before setting up his own company, David Linley Furniture Limited (now known as Linley), where he makes bespoke furniture, upholstery, and interior design products known for their neoclassical appearance and use of inlaid woods.
Accordingly, the first Earl Snowdon was also created Baron Armstrong-Jones, and retained his seat in the Lords until his death in 2017, whereupon his son inherited the earldom but not the life peerage or the seat.
Serena Alleyne Stanhope (born 1 March 1970, Limerick, Ireland), daughter of Viscount Petersham (later the 12th Earl of Harrington) at St. Margaret's Church, Westminster.
He and his wife have two children:


From 2000 until 2002, Linley, his wife and son lived at Kensington Palace with his mother, Princess Margaret, in her declining years.
On 8 April 2002, Linley, along with the Prince of Wales, the Duke of York, and the Earl of Wessex, "stood guard" at the lying-in-state of their grandmother, Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother.
This Vigil of the Princes had taken place only once before, during the lying-in-state of George V in 1936.
The first confirmation that the royal in the extortion attempt was Viscount Linley came from the journalist Nicholas Davies.
In 2011, Linley's daughter, Lady Margarita Armstrong-Jones, was a bridesmaid at the wedding of Prince William and Catherine Middleton.
In 2012, his son, styled by courtesy as Viscount Linley since January 2017, was appointed by the Queen as a page of honour.
