Queen Anne-Marie


Queen Sofía of Spain


Marina, consort of Prince Michael


Princess Maria-Olympia of Greece and Denmark (Greek: Μαρία Ολυμπία Ντε Γκρες, romanized: María-Olympía de Grèce; born 25 July 1996) is a fashion model, socialite and member of the former Greek royal family.
She is the oldest child and only daughter of Pavlos, Crown Prince of Greece, and his wife, Marie-Chantal Miller.
Her paternal grandparents are Constantine II of Greece and Anne-Marie of Denmark, who were the last King and Queen of the Hellenes, while her maternal grandfather is duty free entrepreneur Robert Warren Miller.
Early life

Princess Maria-Olympia of Greece and Denmark was born on 25 July 1996 at Weill Cornell Medical Center in Lenox Hill, New York in Manhattan to Pavlos, Crown Prince of Greece, and his wife, Marie-Chantal.
Her godparents are her paternal aunt Princess Alexia of Greece and Denmark, her maternal aunt Pia Getty, her grandfather's second cousin Charles III, and Prince Michael of Greece and Denmark.
She is the older sister of Prince Constantine-Alexios, Prince Achileas-Andreas, Prince Odysseas Kimon, and Prince Aristidis-Stavros.
She uses the name Olympia in everyday life.
Olympia attended her first couture show around the age of 11 in Rome together with her parents.
Maria-Olympia registered at college in New York in the fall of 2015.
Fashion career

In April 2016, Maria-Olympia posed alongside two of her first cousins, Isabel Getty and Princess Talita
She has modeled for Teen Vogue, Town & Country, Tatler, Hello!, ¡Hola!, and W. In June 2017, Maria-Olympia walked the runway for Dolce & Gabbana.
Using her name Olympia the Saks Potts S/S 2019 show during Copenhagen Fashion Week in August 2018 was named OLYMPIA after her and opened by the princess herself as the first model on the stage.
Personal life

It was reported in May 2016 that Maria-Olympia was romantically involved with her godfather's son and third cousin once removed Prince Harry, but a representative of the British royal family denied the rumors.
On 28 September 2024, she served as a bridesmaid at the wedding of her aunt Princess Theodora of Greece and Denmark and Matthew Kumar at the Metropolitan Cathedral in Athens.
Οn 20 December 2024, Maria-Olympia acquired Greek citizenship, along with other members of the former Greek royal family, under the surname de Grèce.
