Princess Alexandra of Hanover (Alexandra Charlotte Ulrike Maryam Virginia; born 20 July 1999) is a Monegasque figure skater and the fourth child of Princess Caroline of Monaco and the third of Ernst August, Prince of Hanover.
Family

Alexandra was born on 20 July 1999 in Vöcklabruck, Upper Austria.
She was christened on 19 September that year by Horst Hirschler, Landesbischof of the Evangelical-Lutheran Church of Hanover, in a ceremony at her father's hunting lodge Auerbach, near Grünau im Almtal, Upper Austria.
Her godparents are her paternal aunt Alexandra, Princess of Leiningen, maternal half-sister Charlotte Casiraghi, Ulrike Ulmschneider, Maryam Sachs, Virginia Gallico, George Condo, and Eric Maier.
From her father's previous marriage, she has two half-brothers, Hereditary Prince Ernst August and Prince Christian of Hanover.
Her maternal uncle, Albert II, is the sovereign of Monaco.
On her father's side, she is a descendant of Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom, Wilhelm II, German Emperor, and King Christian IX of Denmark.
Alexandra is the only one of Princess Caroline's four children who bears any royal style or title.
While she is formally styled as Her Royal Highness Princess Alexandra of Hanover in Monaco, she is afforded the style and title out of courtesy elsewhere.
Early life, education, and career

Initially enrolled in public school in Le Mée-sur-Seine, near Paris, she finished her primary and secondary schooling Monaco.
Figure skating career

Alexandra began skating when she was ten years old after receiving ice skates as a Christmas present.
At the age of 12, she competed in the "Skate 7" class at the 10th Figure Skating Championship in Monaco, finishing in second place.
Alexandra represented Monaco in figure skating at the 2015 European Youth Olympic Festival in Austria and in two competitive events during the 2015–16 season at the ISU Junior Grand Prix of Figure Skating.
Junior Grand Prix


Programs

Competitive highlights

Detailed results

Personal life

When Alexandra was 11 years old, German entertainment magazine Freizeit Revue published an article about and photographs of her competing at a figure skating competition in France.
Alexandra sought injunctive relief and sued the magazine, taking the case to the German Federal Court of Justice.
In March 2015, Alexandra attended Monaco's Rose Ball for the first time.
In October 2018, Alexandra converted to Catholicism, thereby renouncing her distant place in the line of succession to the British throne.
