Beatrix Amelie Ehrengard Eilika von Storch (née Herzogin von Oldenburg; 27 May 1971) is a German politician and lawyer, who has been the Deputy Parliamentary Leader of the Alternative for Germany since July 2015 and a Member of the Bundestag since September 2017.
Family background

In accordance with the traditions of the House of Oldenburg, her dynastic style from birth was Her Highness Duchess Beatrix Amelie Ehrengard Eilika of Oldenburg.
Personal life

On 22 October 2010 she married German-Chilean businessman Sven von Storch (born 1970), member of a German noble family from Mecklenburg.
He is the son of businessman Berndt Detlev von Storch (1930–2004) and Antje Liete Krüger-Franke (b. 1938).
Education and early career

Von Storch was a banker before she studied law in Heidelberg and Lausanne.
Von Storch was a co-founder of the Göttinger Kreis – Students for the Rule of Law Association – an organization which sought to campaign for reparation for the expulsions and nationalization of land in the Soviet occupied zones of Germany and the former East Germany.
Von Storch was a member of the Free Democratic Party and in 2013, became a founding member of Election Alternative 13 set up by Bernd Lucke as the precursor to Alternative for Germany.
In 2014, Beatrix von Storch was elected a Member of European Parliament representing Alternative for Germany.
Von Storch has been described as a social conservative.
Von Storch also supported the United Kingdom's vote for Brexit and is a friend of British eurosceptic politician Nigel Farage.
She has been characterized as a member and supporter of the more moderate Alternative Mitte faction of the AfD.


Controversies

Legal battle with the Berliner Schaubühne

In November 2015, a leading Berlin theatre, the Schaubühne, was brought into legal conflict with Beatrix von Storch over a play, Falk Richter's FEAR, that parodied AfD leaders as zombies and mass murderers.
Beatrix von Storch is depicted facing retribution for her grandfather's role as a minister in Hitler's government.
Beatrix von Storch and the conservative activist Hedwig von Beverfoerde then requested and obtained a preliminary injunction against the theatre, prohibiting it from using images of them in the production.
Remarks about use of deadly force against refugees

In late February 2016, von Storch was "pied" by members of the German left-wing group Peng Collective at a party meeting in Kassel.
"Rapist hordes" tweet

Von Storch's Twitter account was blocked for twelve hours after she posted a criticism of the Cologne Police Department for publishing a New Years greeting in Arabic as well as in German, French and English.
Other prominent members of the AfD quickly sprang to von Storch's defense, including Alice Weidel.
