Frederik IX (Christian Frederik Franz Michael Carl Valdemar Georg; 11 March 1899 – 14 January 1972) was King of Denmark from 1947 to 1972.
Frederik was born into the House of Glücksburg during the reign of his great-grandfather King Christian IX.
He was the first child of Prince Christian of Denmark and Princess Alexandrine of Mecklenburg-Schwerin (later King Christian X and Queen Alexandrine).
In 1935, he married Princess Ingrid of Sweden.
During Nazi Germany's occupation of Denmark, Frederik acted as regent from 1942 until 1943 on behalf of his father, who had suffered a horseback riding accident in October 1942.
Frederik became king on his father's death in April 1947.
During Frederik's reign, Danish society changed rapidly, the welfare state was expanded and, as a consequence of the booming economy of the 1960s, women entered the labour market.
The modernization brought new demands on the monarchy and Frederik's role as a constitutional monarch.
Frederik died in 1972, and was succeeded by his eldest daughter, Margrethe II.


Birth and family

Frederik was born on 11 March 1899 at his parents' country residence, the Sorgenfri Palace, located on the shores of the small river Mølleåen in Kongens Lyngby north of Copenhagen on the island of Zealand in Denmark, during the reign of his great-grandfather King Christian IX.
His father was Prince Christian of Denmark (later King Christian X), the eldest son of Crown Prince Frederik and Princess Louise of Sweden (later King Frederik VIII and Queen Louise).
His mother was Alexandrine of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, the eldest daughter of Frederick Francis III, Grand Duke of Mecklenburg-Schwerin and Grand Duchess Anastasia Mikhailovna of Russia.
The young prince had 21 godparents: Christian IX of Denmark (his paternal great-grandfather); Crown Prince Frederik of Denmark (his paternal grandfather); the Dowager Grand Duchess Anastasia of Mecklenburg-Schwerin (his maternal grandmother); Grand Duke Michael Nikolaevich of Russia (his maternal great-grandfather); Dowager Grand Duchess Marie of Mecklenburg-Schwerin (his maternal step-great-grandmother); Prince Carl of Denmark (his paternal uncle); Princess Thyra of Denmark (his paternal aunt); Frederick Francis IV, Grand Duke of Mecklenburg-Schwerin (his maternal uncle); George I of Greece (his paternal great-uncle); Albert Edward, Prince of Wales (his paternal great-uncle by marriage); Ernest August, Duke of Cumberland (his paternal great-uncle by marriage); Grand Duke Alexander Mikhailovich of Russia (his maternal great-uncle); his first cousins once removed, Nicholas II of Russia, George, Duke of York, Prince George of Greece and Denmark and Georg Wilhelm, Hereditary Prince of Hanover; Crown Prince Constantine and Crown Princess Sophia of Greece (his first cousin once removed, and his wife); his paternal great-granduncles, Prince Johann of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg and King Oscar II of Sweden and Norway; and Crown Prince Gustaf and Crown Princess Victoria of Sweden (his first cousin twice removed and his wife).
Frederik's only sibling, Knud, was born one year after Frederik.
The family lived in apartments in Christian VIII's Palace at Amalienborg Palace in Copenhagen, in Sorgenfri Palace near the capital and in a summer residence, Marselisborg Palace in Aarhus in Jutland, which Frederik's parents had received as a wedding present from the people of Denmark in 1898.
Early life

Christian IX died on 29 January 1906, and Frederik's grandfather Crown Prince Frederik succeeded him as King Frederik VIII.
Frederik's father became crown prince, and Frederik moved up to second in line to the throne.
Just six years later, on 14 May 1912, King Frederik VIII died, and Frederik's father ascended the throne as King Christian X. Frederik himself became crown prince.
On 1 December 1918, as the Danish–Icelandic Act of Union recognized Iceland as a fully sovereign state in personal union with Denmark through a common monarch, Frederik also became crown prince of Iceland (where his name was officially spelled Friðrik).
Frederik was educated at the Royal Danish Naval Academy (breaking with Danish royal tradition by choosing a naval instead of an army career) and the University of Copenhagen.
In addition, with his love of music, Frederik was an able piano player and conductor.
Marriage and issue

In the 1910s, Alexandrine considered the two youngest daughters of her cousin Tsar Nicholas II, Grand Duchesses Maria and Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia, as possible wives for Frederik until the execution of the Romanov family in 1918.
In 1922, Frederik was engaged to Princess Olga of Greece and Denmark, his double second cousin, through King Christian IX of Denmark and the other through Frederick Francis II.
They never wed.


Instead, on 15 March 1935, a few days after his 36th birthday, his engagement to Princess Ingrid of Sweden (1910–2000), a daughter of Crown Prince Gustaf Adolf (later King Gustaf VI Adolf of Sweden) and his first wife, Princess Margaret of Connaught, was announced.
Frederik and Ingrid were related in several ways.
In descent from Oscar I of Sweden and Leopold, Grand Duke of Baden, they were double third cousins.
In descent from Paul I of Russia, Frederik was a fourth cousin of Ingrid's mother.
Their wedding was one of the greatest media events of the day in Sweden in 1935, and among the wedding guests were the King and Queen of Denmark, the King and Queen of Belgium and the Crown Prince and Crown Princess of Norway.
Upon their return to Denmark, the couple were given Frederik VIII's Palace at Amalienborg Palace in Copenhagen as their primary residence and Gråsten Palace in Northern Schleswig as a summer residence.
Their daughters are:


Reign

From 1942 until 1943, Frederik acted as regent on behalf of his father who was temporarily incapacitated after a fall from his horse in October 1942.
On 20 April 1947, Christian X died, and Frederik succeeded to the throne.
Frederik IX's reign saw great change.
In other words, Denmark became a modern country, which meant new demands on the monarchy.
Changes to the Act of Succession

As King Frederik IX and Queen Ingrid had no sons, it was expected that the king's younger brother, Prince Knud, would inherit the throne, in accordance with Denmark's succession law (Royal Ordinance of 1853).
As a result, his eldest daughter, Margrethe, became heir presumptive.
Death and funeral

Shortly after Frederik delivered his New Year's address on 31 December 1971, he became ill with flu-like symptoms.
He was succeeded by his eldest daughter, Margrethe II.
Following his death, Frederik's coffin was transported to his home at Amalienborg Palace, where it stood until 18 January, when it was moved to the chapel at Christiansborg Palace.
There, the coffin was placed on castrum doloris, a ceremony largely unchanged since introduced at the burial of Frederik III in 1670, and the last remaining royal ceremony where the Danish Crown Regalia is used.
The gun carriage was pulled by 48 seamen and was escorted by honor guards from the Danish Army, Air Force, and Navy, as well as honor guards from France, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
Queen Ingrid survived her husband by 28 years.
Legacy

In 1934, the Crown Prince Frederik Range in Greenland was named after him when it was first mapped by Sir Martin Lindsay during the British Trans-Greenland Expedition.
On 20 April 1982, a statue of King Frederik IX dressed in the uniform of an admiral was unveiled by the Copenhagen harbour on the 35th anniversary of his accession to the throne in 1947 and in the tenth year after his death.
Folktale

In the southern city of Sønderborg, Frederik has a dish named after himself.
The dish is called "Kong Fiddes livret" (King Frederik's favorite).
The name Fidde is a common diminutive nickname for people named Frederik in the southern parts of Denmark.
The dish is supposedly one that was regularly served to Frederik on his birthday at Gråsten Palace.
