Anne, Princess Royal (Anne Elizabeth Alice Louise; born 15 August 1950), is a member of the British royal family.
She is the second child and only daughter of Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, and the sister of King Charles III.
Third in the line of succession to the British throne at birth, she is 18th in line as of 2026.
She has held the title of Princess Royal since 1987.
Born at Clarence House, Anne was educated at Benenden School and began carrying out official royal duties in early adulthood.
In 1976, she became the first member of the British royal family to compete in the Olympic Games.
Anne continues to undertake engagements and official duties on behalf of the monarch – she has attended more than 20,000 such events since commencing royal duties in 1968.
In 1973, Anne married Captain Mark Phillips; the couple separated in 1989 and divorced in 1992.
They have two children, Peter Phillips and Zara Tindall.
In 1992, she married Commander (now Vice Admiral)
Sir Timothy Laurence, whom she met during his service as an equerry to Queen Elizabeth II.
Early life and education

Anne was born at 11:50 am on 15 August 1950 at Clarence House in London, during the reign of her maternal grandfather, King George VI.
She was the second child and only daughter of Princess Elizabeth, Duchess of Edinburgh (later Queen Elizabeth II), and Philip, Duke of Edinburgh.
Anne was baptised in the Music Room at Buckingham Palace on 21 October 1950, by the Archbishop of York, Cyril Garbett.
At the time of her birth, she was third in the line of succession to the British throne, behind her mother and elder brother, Charles (later King Charles III).
She rose to second in 1952 after her grandfather's death and her mother's accession; she is currently 18th in line.
A governess, Catherine Peebles, was appointed to oversee the early education of Anne and her brothers, Charles, Andrew, and Edward.
Peebles supervised Anne's lessons at Buckingham Palace.
Owing to her young age, Anne did not attend her mother's coronation in June 1953.
In May 1959, a Girl Guides unit, the 1st Buckingham Palace Guide Company, incorporating the  Holy Trinity Brompton Brownie pack, was re-formed specifically so that Anne, like her mother and her aunt Princess Margaret before her, could socialise with girls her own age.
The company remained active until 1963, when Anne left for boarding school.
She began undertaking royal engagements in 1969, at the age of 18.
In 1970, Anne briefly had a relationship with Andrew Parker Bowles, who later married Camilla Shand.
Camilla subsequently became the second wife and queen consort of Anne's elder brother, Charles III.
Anne was also briefly linked to the Olympic equestrian Richard Meade.
Equestrianism

In spring 1971, Anne finished fourth at the Rushall Horse Trials.
She also rode winners in horse racing, competing in the Grand Military Steeplechase at Sandown Park Racecourse and the Diamond Stakes at Royal Ascot.
For more than five years, Anne competed with the British eventing team, winning silver medals in both the individual and team disciplines at the 1975 European Eventing Championship.
The following year, she took part in the 1976 Olympic Games in Montreal as a member of the British team, riding the Queen's horse Goodwill in Eventing.
Anne suffered a concussion halfway through the cross-country course but remounted and completed the event; she later stated that she had no memory of making the remaining jumps.
Anne served as president of the Fédération Équestre Internationale from 1986 until 1994.
On 5 February 1987, she became the first member of the royal family to appear as a contestant on a television quiz show when she took part in the BBC panel game A Question of Sport.
In June 2024, Anne was taken to Southmead Hospital in Bristol with minor injuries and concussion, believed to have been caused by an impact with a horse's legs or head.
Marriages and children

Marriage to Mark Phillips

Anne met Mark Phillips, a lieutenant in the 1st Queen's Dragoon Guards, in 1968 at a party for horse enthusiasts.
Media reports stated that Phillips was offered an earldom, as was then customary for untitled men marrying into the royal family, but he and Anne declined the honour.
The couple had two children: Peter (born 1977) and Zara Phillips (born 1981).
Anne and Phillips have five grandchildren.
On 31 August 1989, Anne and Phillips announced their intention to separate; the couple had been rarely seen together in public, and both had been romantically linked with other people.
On 13 April 1992, the Palace announced that Anne had filed for divorce, which was finalised ten days later.
Marriage to Sir Timothy Laurence

Anne met Timothy Laurence, a commander in the Royal Navy, while he was serving on the Royal Yacht Britannia.
Their relationship developed in early 1989, three years after Laurence had been appointed an equerry to the Queen.
In 1989, the existence of private letters from Laurence to Anne was revealed by The Sun newspaper.
For the wedding, Anne wore a white jacket over a "demure, cropped-to-the-knee dress" and a spray of white flowers in her hair.
Kidnapping attempt

On 20 March 1974, Anne and Mark Phillips were returning to Buckingham Palace when a car forced their Rolls-Royce to stop on Pall Mall.
Inspector James Beaton, Anne's personal protection officer, left the car to shield her and attempted to disarm Ball.
Beaton's Walther PPK jammed, and he was shot, as was Anne's chauffeur, Alex Callender, when he tried to intervene.
Ball approached Anne's car and told her that he intended to kidnap her and hold her for ransom, the amount reported variously as £2 million or £3 million, which he claimed he intended to donate to the National Health Service.
When Ball ordered Anne to get out of the car, she replied, "Not bloody likely!"
Anne eventually exited from the opposite side of the limousine, as did her lady-in-waiting, Rowena Brassey.
A passing pedestrian, former boxer Ron Russell, punched Ball and led Anne away from the scene.
Police Constable Michael Hills then arrived; he too was shot, but had already called assistance.
Detective Constable Peter Edmonds responded, pursued Ball, and arrested him.
Beaton, who had been Anne's sole bodyguard, later reflected on royal security at the time "I had nothing...
For his defence of Anne, Beaton was awarded the George Cross by the Queen, who was visiting Indonesia when the incident occurred; Hills and Russell were awarded the George Medal, and Callender, McConnell, and Edmonds were awarded the Queen's Gallantry Medal.
Anne visited Beaton in hospital to thank him.
It was widely reported that the Queen paid off Russell's mortgage, but this was untrue: Russell stated in 2020 that a police officer had suggested it might happen, leading him to stop making payments and nearly lose his home after four months.
The attempted kidnapping is the subject of the Granada Television docudrama To Kidnap a Princess (2006) and inspired storylines in Tom Clancy's novel Patriot Games.
Activities

Public appearances

Anne undertakes a wide range of duties and engagements on behalf of the sovereign.
Kevin S. MacLeod, the then Canadian Secretary to the Queen, said of her in 2014: "Her credo is, 'Keep me busy.
In December 2017, it was reported that Anne had carried out the most official engagements that year of any member of the royal family, including the Queen.
Anne's first public engagement took place in 1969, when she opened an educational and training centre in Shropshire.
In 1990, she became the first member of the royal family to make an official visit to the Soviet Union, travelling there as a guest of President Mikhail Gorbachev and his government.
In August 2016, Anne returned to Russia to visit the city of Arkhangelsk for the 75th anniversary of Operation Dervish, one of the first Arctic convoys of World War II.
In April 2022, Anne and her husband toured Australia and Papua New Guinea to mark the Queen's Platinum Jubilee.
On 12 September 2022, at St Giles' Cathedral in Edinburgh, Anne became the first woman to participate in a Vigil of the Princes, standing guard by her mother's coffin.
It was later revealed that she had been the informant at her mother's death at Balmoral, signing the death certificate alongside the attending doctor.
On 21 April 2026, Anne opened the Queen Elizabeth II Garden on the centenary of her mother's birth.
Patronages

Anne is involved with more than 200 charities and organisations in an official capacity.
She founded The Princess Royal Trust for Carers in 1991.
She is also patron of St. Andrew's First Aid.
Anne serves as a British representative in the International Olympic Committee as an administrator, and was a member of the London Organising Committee for the Olympic Games.
Following the retirement of the Queen Mother in 1981, Anne was elected by graduates of the University of London as Chancellor, a position she has held since that year.
In 2007, she was appointed by the Queen as Grand Master of the Royal Victorian Order, a role previously held by her grandmother.
She is a Royal Fellow of both the Royal Society and the Academy of Medical Sciences, becoming the latter's first Royal Fellow.
As of 2022, the Royal Society has four Royal Fellows:
Anne; William, Prince of Wales; Edward, Duke of Kent; and King Charles.
Anne was elected Chancellor of the University of Edinburgh with effect from 31 March 2011, succeeding her father, who stepped down in 2010.
Also in 2011, she became president of City and Guilds of London Institute, Master of the Corporation of Trinity House, and president of the Royal Society of Arts, all in succession to her father.
In 2023, she succeeded the Duke of Kent as president of the Commonwealth War Graves Commission.
Anne is the patron of Transaid, a charity founded by Save the Children and the Chartered Institute of Logistics and Transport that aims to provide safe and sustainable transport in developing countries.
She has been patron of the Royal National Children's Foundation since 2002, and of the industrial heritage museum, Aerospace Bristol since 2016.
In 2022, Anne was named honorary chair of National Lighthouse Museum's Illuminating Future Generations campaign, a project established to raise funds for the museum's gallery space.
She is also patron of the Royal College of Occupational Therapists, the Special Forces Club, Royal College of Midwives, Royal College of Emergency Medicine, Magpas Air Ambulance, Edinburgh University's Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies, Royal Holloway, University of London, International Students House, London, Acid Survivors Trust International, Townswomen's Guilds, Citizens Advice, the Royal Edinburgh Military Tattoo, the Scottish Rugby Union, and the Royal Society of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce.
In 2017, Anne became Prime Warden of the Worshipful Company of Fishmongers and a Governor of Gresham's School.
In 2025, she was announced as patron of Friends of the Elderly, taking on the role previously held by Queen Elizabeth II for more than 60 years.
Public image and style

Anne has been described as the royal family's "trustiest anchor" and a "beacon of good, old-fashioned public service" and has carried out more than 20,000 engagements since her 18th birthday.
In her early adulthood, she was characterised as a "royal renegade" for choosing to forgo titles for her children despite being the "spare to the heir".
The media often labelled the young Anne "aloof" and "haughty", earning her the nickname "her royal rudeness".
Vanity Fair wrote that Anne "has a reputation for having inherited her father's famously sharp tongue and waspish wit".
She has frequently been named the "hardest working royal", and carried out 11,088 engagements between 2002 and 2022, more than any other member of the royal family.
Anne remains one of Britain's most popular royals.
Tominey wrote that Anne's public role is a "contradiction of both protocol taskmaster and occasional rule-breaker".
Anne reportedly "insists on doing her own make-up and hair" and sometimes drives herself to engagements, having pleaded guilty to two separate speeding offences after running late.
In 1974, she became the first member of the royal family to hold an HGV licence, later saying "I was considering earning my living by driving, and with my HGV licence, I don't mind spending time on my own behind the wheel".
She does not shake hands with the public during walkabouts, explaining, "the theory was that you couldn't shake hands with everybody, so don't start."
British Vogue editor Edward Enninful has said that "Princess Anne is a true style icon and was all about sustainable fashion before the rest of us really knew what that meant".
She is known for recycling outfits, including a floral-print dress worn both to the wedding of the Prince of Wales in 1981 and the wedding of Lady Rose Windsor in 2008.
Anne is patron of the UK Fashion and Textile Association.
She is also one of the few women in the royal family to wear a military uniform.
According to The Guardian, she is "rarely seen without a brooch" at royal events.
She presented the Queen Elizabeth II award for British design at London Fashion Week in 2020.
Anne has appeared on three British Vogue covers: the September 1971 issue at age 21, and the May and November 1973 issues marking her engagement to Mark Phillips.
Anne is the first member of the royal family to have been convicted of a criminal offence.
Titles, styles, honours and arms

Titles and styles

Anne is the seventh Princess Royal, an appellation granted only to the eldest daughter of the Sovereign.
The previous holder was Princess Mary, Countess of Harewood, the daughter of King George V and Anne's great-aunt.
Honours

Anne is a Royal Knight Companion of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, an Extra Knight of the Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle, Grand Master and Dame Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, and a Dame Grand Cross of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem.
She is a recipient of the Royal Family Order of Elizabeth II, the Royal Family Order of Charles III, and serves as a Personal Aide-de-Camp to the Sovereign.
Arms

Ancestry

Anne's ancestry can be traced as far back as Cerdic, King of Wessex (519–534).
