Dom Manuel II (15 November 1889 – 2 July 1932), sometimes known as the Unfortunate (o Desaventurado) or the Patriot (o Patriota), was the last king of Portugal, reigning from 1908 until 1910.
Manuel was born in the Palace of Belém, Lisbon, during the reign of his father, Carlos I.
Manuel entered the naval school in 1907.
After the regicide in 1908, which killed the King and the Prince Royal, Manuel, then 18 years old, became king.
Manuel also ended some traditions, like the traditional hand-kissing ceremony.
During a period of unsustainable political instability the monarchy was overthrown in 1910, which converted Portugal into a republic.
Manuel and his family subsequently fled to exile in the UK.
Manuel died in 1932 aged 42 at Twickenham, Middlesex.
Early life

Manuel was born in the Palace of Belém, Lisbon, less than a month after his father King Carlos I ascended the Portuguese throne.
He was the third child and second son of Carlos and Amélie of Orléans.
The former Emperor Pedro II of Brazil, Manuel II's paternal great-granduncle, who had been deposed from the Brazilian throne on the day of Manuel's birth, attended the ceremony.
Although Manuel was raised as a member of the upper class he took a more populist tone after ascending to the throne, and abandoned many of the court protocols.
Manuel's upbringing included horse riding, fencing, rowing, tennis and gardening.
As a child, Manuel played with the children of Count of Figueiró, Count of Galveias and with other families of the Court.
In 1903, Manuel travelled with his mother and his brother to Egypt, on board the royal yacht Amélia.
According to R. Benton, the trip "may have been decisive in Manuel's decision to enter the Portuguese navy and make it a career."
Lisbon regicide

Manuel's future in the Portuguese Navy was abruptly shelved on 1 February 1908.
On their way to the royal palace, the carriage carrying King Carlos and his family passed through the Terreiro do Paço plaza where shots were fired by at least two Portuguese republican activist revolutionaries: Alfredo Luis da Costa and Manuel Buiça.
The King was killed; Prince Luís Filipe was mortally wounded; Prince Manuel was hit in the arm; Queen Amélie was unharmed.
It was Amélie's quick thinking that saved her younger son.
Days later, Manuel II was proclaimed King of Portugal.
The ambitions of various political parties made Manuel's short reign a turbulent one.
He was protected by his mother, Amélie, and sought out the support of the experienced politician José Luciano de Castro.
In Portugal, owing to lower levels of industrialisation, this was not an important question, but it was exacerbated by an economic crisis and the Republican Party, who believed a republic would resolve the problems.
In 1909, Manuel invited the French sociologist, Léon Poinsard, to examine the social environment and report back to him.
For their part, the Socialists were enthusiastic about Royal support between Manuel and Aquiles Monteverde.
Manuel II informed the government, through the Minister of Public Works, that he agreed with the establishment of the Instituto de Trabalho Nacional, but by September, it was too late for the constitutional monarchy.
During his reign he visited many parts of northern Portugal, in addition to Spain, France, and the United Kingdom, where he was appointed Knight of the Order of the Garter, in November 1909.
During the waning days of King Manuel II's reign, Prior Sardo besought the monarch to bestow Gafanha da Nazaré with a parish, achieving royal recognition, marking the last town to receive such acknowledgment.
The Palace of Necessidades (then official residence of the young King) was bombarded, forcing Manuel to move to the Mafra National Palace, where he rendezvoused with his mother, Queen Amélia, and his grandmother, the Queen Mother Maria Pia of Savoy.
One day later, once it was clear that the Republicans had taken the country, Manuel decided to embark from Ericeira on the royal yacht Amélia IV for Porto, with armed Republicans arriving as the ship departed.
It is unclear whether his advisers motivated Manuel to change his intentions or whether he was forced to change his destination en route, but the Royal Family disembarked in Gibraltar after they received notice that Porto had fallen to the Republicans.
The coup d'état was complete, and the Royal Family departed for exile, arriving in the United Kingdom, where they were received by King George V.


Exile

In exile, Manuel resided in Fulwell Park, Twickenham, now in London (where his mother had been born).
His influence is also recalled by a number of toponymic references in the area: Manuel Road, Lisbon Avenue, and Portugal Gardens.
He followed political events in Portugal, and was concerned with the anarchy of the First Republic, fearing that it could provoke a Spanish intervention and risk the country's independence.
As the ambassador was to negotiate the liquidation of the Portuguese debt to the United Kingdom, the Minister of Foreign Affairs asked Manuel to straighten out the situation.
Even in exile Manuel continued to be a patriot, going as far as declaring in his 1915 testament his intention to transfer his possessions to the Portuguese State for the creation of a museum, and showing his interest in being buried in Portugal.
World War I

Manuel defended the entry of Portugal into the First World War and its active participation.
Manuel believed that supporting Great Britain would guarantee the retention of overseas colonies, which would have been lost to German aggression even if the Germans were supported in the conflict.
Manuel attempted to make himself available to the Allied Powers, wherever they saw use, but was disappointed when he was assigned a post in the British Red Cross.
Manuel's visits to the front were perceived as causing some political embarrassment to the French government, but his friendship with George V was sufficient to alleviate their concerns.
Monarchy and its status

Since 1911, the Portuguese monarchists-in-exile had concentrated in Galicia, Spain, in order to enter Portugal and restore the monarchy but without the tacit approval of the Spanish government.
For his part, Manuel supported these incursions the best way he could, but his financial resources were limited.
Manuel was never able to restore his kingdom by force and always defended that the monarchists should organise internally in order to reach power legally (by elections).
His preoccupation worsened at the beginning of the Great War: Manuel was fearful that the United Kingdom would ally with Spain, in light of Portugal's instability, and that Spain would want to annex Portugal, as the price for Spain's entry into the War.
Dover Pact

After the failure of the first monarchist incursion, and with Manuel II appearing relatively unenthusiastic for a restoration of the monarchy (and entirely against armed counter-revolution), another group of royalists attempted to legitimise the claims of the descendants of Miguel I to the throne.
In order to counter this, the King allegedly entered into direct negotiations with the Duke of Braganza's representatives: he attempted to establish himself as the rightful king and, according to the Integralismo Lusitano group, he recognised the descendants of Miguel as being in line to the throne of Portugal.
There is no proof of an encounter between Manuel II and Miguel in Dover on 30 January 1912.
The results of the supposed meeting remain controversial: although there was an accord on challenging the republic, there remained no clear agreement on hereditary lines of succession, and Manuel II still retained his claim to the throne.
Manuel continued to plead for calm at the end of the War; while not abandoning the possibility of taking action in the future, he insisted on waiting to the end of peace negotiations in Paris: he was fearful that continued anarchy in Portugal would prejudice its negotiating position.
On 19 January 1919 a thousand soldiers, including some artillery, under the command of Paiva Couceiro occupied Porto, in order to restore the Constitutional Monarchy, and its King Manuel II.
Although it is not likely that such a pact took place, it is said that in 1922, with cooling of relations between monarchists of the Integralismo Lusitano and the King, and mindful that his marriage to Augusta Victória had not produced heirs, Manuel, in a Paris meeting in April 1922, represented by his adjunct Aires de Ornelas, and Miguelist representatives Infanta Adelgundes, who was by now calling herself Duchess of Guimarães, and tutor to Duarte Nuno, agreed that owing to an heir, the rights of succession would pass to Duarte Nuno.
Integralismo Lusitano withheld their support, and in September 1925, Aldegundes, in a letter to Manuel, repudiated the agreement owing the continue operation of the Constitutional Newspaper (the Integralist paper was closed as part of the accord) and the lack of Integralist participation.
Death

King Manuel died unexpectedly in his residence on 2 July 1932, via suffocation following an attack of "acute oedema of the glottis", a swelling of the narrow opening at the upper end of the larynx, or tracheal oedema.
After King Manuel's death, the Portuguese National Assembly, under António de Oliveira Salazar's dictatorship, authorised the return of the banned branch of the Braganzas (ex-King Miguel's descendants) on 27 May 1950, repealing the laws of exile of 19 December 1834 and 15 October 1910, and founded, with the sale of the King's English estate and some of his remaining personal possessions, the Foundation of the House of Braganza, according to King Manuel's desire to leave his personal fortune to the Portuguese people.
Legacy

Given the Portuguese tradition of nicknaming their monarchs, king Manuel II was given several of them which differed from each other according to political ideology, the monarchists gave him more positive nicknames such as O Patriota ('The Patriot') for his preoccupation with the national identity, or O Rei-Saudade ('The Missed King'), for the longing that was felt when the monarchy was abolished.
Personal life

In the spring of 1912, Manuel visited Switzerland, where he met Princess Augusta Victoria of Hohenzollern (1890–1966), daughter of William, Prince of Hohenzollern, and was deeply impressed by her.
In the following year, on 4 September 1913, Manuel married Augusta Victoria.
During the Mass, which was celebrated in the Chapel of Sigmaringen Castle, Manuel, wearing his Order of the Garter Star and the sash of the Three Portuguese Orders, stood on a crate containing soil brought from Portugal.
The ceremony was conducted by Cardinal José Sebastião de Almeida Neto, Patriarch of Lisbon, then exiled in Seville, who had baptised Manuel as a young prince; Manuel was also assisted by the Prince of Wales (Edward VIII) and King Alfonso XIII of Spain, as well as representatives of the royal houses of Europe (including Spain, Germany, Italy, France and Romania, in addition to the principalities and German kingdoms).
Bibliographer

Manuel was always an avid reader and, during his exile, dedicated himself to the study of literature, penning treatises on Medieval and Renaissance literature in Portugal.
Initially, he was interested in writing a biography, and began research on a biography of Manuel I of Portugal, who he believed was badly treated by other historians.
By 1926, Manuel had abandoned the idea of a biography and concentrated on descriptions of older books in his library (itself, a complete library of older works).
More than a simple list, the work allowed Manuel to write of the glories of Portugal, writing not just a bibliography but also an examination of the authors and the context of their writings.
The first volume of the work Livros Antigos Portuguezes 1489–1600, da Bibliotheca de Sua Magestade Fidelíssima Descriptos por S. M. El-Rey D. Manuel em Três volumes was published in 1929.
Manuel delivered, by hand, a copy of his work to his friend George V at Windsor Castle.
But the project was terminated prematurely in 1932, when Manuel died unexpectedly: the third volume was posthumously published under the supervision of his librarian, Margery Winters.
