Prince George, Duke of Kent (George Edward Alexander Edmund; 20 December 1902 – 25 August 1942), was a member of the British royal family, the fourth son of King George V and Queen Mary, and a younger brother of Kings Edward VIII and George VI.
He served in the Royal Navy during the 1920s before briefly working as a civil servant, and in 1934 was created Duke of Kent.
That same year he married Princess Marina of Greece and Denmark, with whom he had three children:
Edward, Alexandra and Michael.
George was killed in an air crash in Scotland in 1942, aged 39, becoming the first member of the royal family in more than four centuries to die on active service.
Early life

George was born at 7:35 pm on 20 December 1902 at York Cottage on the Sandringham Estate in Norfolk, England.
His father was the Prince of Wales (later King George V), the only surviving son of King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra.
His mother was the Princess of Wales, later Queen Mary, the eldest child and only daughter of the Duke and Duchess of Teck.
Edward, Albert, and Henry.
His godparents were King Edward VII (his paternal grandfather); Prince Valdemar of Denmark (his paternal granduncle, represented by Prince Carl of Denmark, his paternal uncle and first cousin once removed); Prince Louis of Battenberg (husband of his father's cousin); Queen Alexandra (his paternal grandmother); Empress Dowager Maria Feodorovna (his paternal grandaunt, represented by Princess Victoria of the United Kingdom, his paternal aunt); and Princess Christian of Schleswig-Holstein (his paternal grandaunt).
Education and career

George received his early education from a tutor and later followed his elder brother, Henry, to St Peter's Court, a preparatory school at Broadstairs, Kent.
At the age of 13, like his elder brothers – the Prince of Wales (later Edward VIII) and Albert, (later George VI) – he entered naval college, first at Osborne and subsequently at Dartmouth.
He remained on active service in the Royal Navy until March 1929, serving on HMS Iron Duke and later on the flagship of the Atlantic Fleet (renamed the Home Fleet in 1932), HMS Nelson.
He served on the latter as a lieutenant on the admiral's staff before transferring in 1928 to HMS Durban on the America and West Indies Station, based at the Royal Naval Dockyard in Bermuda.
After leaving the navy, he briefly held posts at the Foreign Office and later the Home Office, becoming the first member of the royal family to work as a civil servant.
From January to April 1931, George and his elder brother, the Prince of Wales, undertook an 18,000‐mile tour of South America.
On 23 June 1936, George was appointed a personal aide-de-camp to his eldest brother, the new king, Edward VIII.
Following Edward's abdication, he was appointed a personal naval aide-de-camp to his elder brother, now George VI.
On 12 March 1937, he was commissioned as a colonel in the British Army and as a group captain in the Royal Air Force (RAF).
He was also appointed Colonel-in-Chief of the Royal Fusiliers from the same date.
In October 1938, George was appointed Governor-General of Australia in succession to Lord Gowrie, with effect from November 1939.
On 8 June 1939, he was promoted to rear admiral in the Royal Navy, major-general in the British Army, and air vice-marshal in the Royal Air Force.
Personal life

Marriage and children

On 9 October 1934, in anticipation of his forthcoming marriage to his second cousin, Princess Marina of Greece and Denmark, he was created Duke of Kent, Earl of St Andrews, and Baron Downpatrick.
They had three children:


Relationships

George was rumoured to have had affairs with the musical star Jessie Matthews, the writer Cecil Roberts, and Noël Coward, a suggestion which Coward's long-term partner, Graham Payn, denied.
His first significant relationship was with Gladys Jean Combe, younger daughter of Captain Christian Combe of the Royal Horse Guards and Lady Jane Combe, daughter of George Conyngham, 3rd Marquess Conyngham.
George met her while serving as a sub-lieutenant on HMS Mackay during one of his trips ashore.
George was also linked to a ménage à trois involving Preston and José Uriburu, the bisexual son of the Argentine ambassador to the United Kingdom, José Uriburu Tezanos.
According to the memoirs of Loelia, Duchess of Westminster, George's brother Edward VIII believed that the child was Michael Temple Canfield (1926–1969), the adopted son of the American publisher Cass Canfield and the first husband of Lee Radziwill, sister of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis.
After being sent by the King to the Far East, George began a relationship in Singapore in 1926 with Leila Devitt, a hostess and wife of a commodities magnate who was 10 years his senior.
He was also associated with several other women during his life, including Poppy Baring (whom the King and Queen considered unsuitable as a royal bride), Lois Sturt, Paula Gellibrand, Audrey Coats, Edythe d'Erlanger, Myrtle Farquharson, Florence Mills, and Adelaide Hall.
In an article published in June of 2024, the Daily Telegraph provided a list of the Duke's known and suspected romantic partners, while casting doubt on others who have been widely named.
The article directly called into question the factual accuracy of some elements of the article about the Duke in the English language Wikipedia at that time, specifically relating to his private life and romantic relationships.
RAF career

As a young man, George became convinced that the future lay in aviation.
He was the first member of the royal family to cross the Atlantic Ocean by air.
Before his flying career, he had entered the Royal Navy and received intelligence training while stationed at Rosyth.
In March 1937, he was granted a commission in the Royal Air Force as a group captain.
He was appointed Honorary Air Commodore of No. 500 (County of Kent) Squadron, Auxiliary Air Force, in August 1938.
He was promoted to air vice-marshal in June 1939, alongside corresponding promotions to flag and general officer rank in the Royal Navy and British Army.
In 1939 he returned to active service as a rear admiral in the Royal Navy, but in April 1940 transferred to the Royal Air Force.
Freemasonry

George was initiated into freemasonry on 12 April 1928 in Navy Lodge No. 2612.
He served as master of Navy Lodge in 1931, and was also a member of Prince of Wales's Lodge No. 259 and Royal Alpha Lodge No. 16, of which he became master in 1940.
Death

On 25 August 1942, George and 14 others took off in RAF Short Sunderland flying boat W4026 from Invergordon, Ross and Cromarty, for a non‐operational flight to Iceland.
George and all but one of those on board were killed.
His death in RAF service marked the first time in more than 450 years that a member of the royal family had died on active service.
George's body was interred initially in the Royal Vault of St George's Chapel, Windsor; in 1968 he was reburied in the Royal Burial Ground, Frogmore, directly behind Queen Victoria's mausoleum.
His elder son, six-year-old Edward, succeeded him as Duke of Kent.
Marina, his wife, had given birth to their third child, Michael, only seven weeks before George's death.
Jack's niece has claimed that he told his brother that George had been at the controls of the aircraft, that Jack had dragged him from the pilot's seat after the crash, and that there was an additional person on board whose identity has never been revealed.
In popular culture

George's early life is dramatised in Stephen Poliakoff's television serial The Lost Prince (2003), a biography of his younger brother John.
In the production, the teenage Prince 'Georgie' is portrayed as sensitive, intelligent, artistic, and unusually sympathetic to John's difficulties.
He is shown as detesting his time at the Royal Naval College and as having a strained relationship with his austere father.
In May 2008, the BBC aired the Radio 4 comedy Hut 33, Series 2, Episode 1, titled "The Royal Visit".
The main guest character in the episode is the Duke of Kent, played by Michael Fenton-Stevens.
Set at Bletchley Park, the programme depicts a team of codebreakers instructed to conceal the nature of their work during an impromptu royal visit.
Within the episode's comic narrative, the Duke is described as a Nazi spy and is portrayed as promiscuous and bisexual, attempting to obtain sexual favours from a male member of staff, while a female character recalls a previous liaison with him.
Much of George's later life was outlined in the documentary film The Queen's Lost Uncle.
George and his eldest brother, the Prince of Wales (later Edward VIII), appear in Poliakoff's BBC serial Dancing on the Edge (2013), in which they are shown as supporters of jazz and encouragers of Louis Lester's Jazz Band.
A sexual attraction to Lester on George's part is also suggested.
Honours and arms

letters


Appointments

Military

Civic

Arms

Around the time of his elder brother Prince Henry's twenty-first birthday, Prince George was granted the use of the Royal Arms, differenced by a label argent of three points, each bearing an anchor azure.
