Queen Margrethe II


Christian, Crown Prince of Denmark, Count of Monpezat RE (Christian Valdemar Henri John; born 15 October 2005), is the heir apparent to the Danish throne.
He is the eldest child of King Frederik X and Queen Mary.
He was born during the reign of his paternal grandmother, Queen Margrethe II.
He became Crown Prince of Denmark following his grandmother's abdication and his father's subsequent ascension to the Danish throne in January 2024.
Early life

Christian was born on 15 October 2005 at 1:57 am CET at Rigshospitalet, the Copenhagen University Hospital, in Copenhagen.
At sunset on the same day beacon bonfires were lit all across Denmark, while Naval Home Guard vessels lit their searchlights and directed them towards the capital.
Christian was baptised on 21 January 2006 in Christiansborg Palace Chapel by the Bishop of Copenhagen Erik Norman Svendsen.
He was baptised at the royal baptismal font which has been used for the baptism of royal children in Denmark since 1671, and wore the royal christening gown which was made for his great-great-grandfather, King Christian X, in 1870.
Christian's godparents are his paternal uncle, Prince Joachim of Denmark; his maternal aunt, Jane Stephens; his father's first cousin, the Crown Prince of Greece; the Crown Prince and Crown Princess of Norway; the Crown Princess of Sweden; and two friends of the couple, Jeppe Handwerk and Hamish Campbell.
He was named Christian Valdemar Henri John, continuing the Danish royal tradition of alternating between the names Christian and Frederik in direct line.
He received a number of presents on the occasion of his christening, including a pony called Flikflak from the Folketing, Denmark's national parliament.
On 11 September 2006, Per Stig Møller, Denmark's Minister for Foreign Affairs, formally wrote and signed a hand-written document confirming Prince Christian's place in the line of succession.
The prince's full name, his dates of birth and baptism, and the names of his godparents were recorded as dictated by the Royal Law of 1799.
Education

Christian was the first member of the Danish royal family to attend nursery school.
The Danish court announced in October 2019 that Christian and his three younger siblings would undertake a 12-week school stay at Lemania-Verbier International School in Verbier, Switzerland, in the beginning of 2020.
The stay was cut short and the siblings returned home in March due to the intensification of the COVID-19 situation in Denmark.
In April 2021, it was announced that Christian would undertake his secondary education at the Danish boarding school Herlufsholm, starting in August 2021.
In June 2022, shortly after finishing the first year of his upper secondary education, it was announced that Christian would no longer attend the school, after recurring allegations of bullying, violence and sexual abuse at the institution surfaced in a documentary.
Activities

Christian undertook his first official engagement when he attended the opening of a new elephant house at the Copenhagen Zoo with his grandfather, Prince Henrik in 2008.
Christian opened the elephant house by pressing a button on an interactive console.
The elephants were a gift from the King and Queen of Thailand to the Queen and Prince Consort of Denmark on their visit to Thailand.
In 2010, Christian and his grandfather revealed a portrait of Prince Ulrik at the Museum of National History at Frederiksborg Castle, and in 2012, also at the Museum of National History, he and Queen Margrethe II revealed the first ever portrait of him (with his father and grandmother), commissioned for the Queen's Ruby Jubilee.
He and his siblings accompanied their parents on an official visit to Greenland on 1–8 August 2014, where Christian partook in several official engagements.
Christian was confirmed on 15 May 2021 in the Royal Chapel of Fredensborg Palace.
On 13 June 2021, Christian accompanied his grandmother and father at the COVID-19 postponed centenary of the reunification of Denmark and Northern Schleswig, following the route his great-great-grandfather Christian X rode on 15 July 1920 over the old border between Denmark and Germany.
Accompanying his father, Christian attended a memorial for the victims of the 2022 Copenhagen mall shooting on 5 July 2022.
For the 18th birthday of Prince Christian, which marked the beginning of his royal duties, Margrethe II hosted a banquet at Christianborg Palace.
In attendance were members of the Danish royal family, including Christian's parents, siblings, cousins and Princess Benedikte, and 200 members of the Danish public youth who had distinguished themselves in sport, art and culture.
Additionally, Margrethe II invited eleven members of foreign royal families – Queen Anne-Marie of Greece, the Crown Prince and Crown Princess of Greece, the Crown Prince and Crown Princess of Norway, Princess Ingrid Alexandra of Norway, the Crown Princess of Sweden, the Duke of Västergötland, the Duchess of Östergötland, the Princess of Orange and the Duchess of Brabant.
A photo was captured on the night that contained the future monarchs of Belgium, Denmark, the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden.
"


On 20 May 2024, Christian carried out his first solo engagement when he participated in Royal Run 2024's Brønderslev leg.
Military service

On 3 February 2025, Christian began his conscription with the Guard Hussar Regiment at Antvorskov Barracks in Slagelse.
During his military service, Christian has renounced his salary and any money that conscripts receive.
On 28 May 2025, Christian completed his conscription following the completion of the traditional "REX-tour", a strenuous four-day military exercise undertaken by conscripts in the Guard Hussar Regiment and the Royal Life Guards.
In January 2026, it was announced that Christian will serve as a platoon commander in the Royal Life Guards based at Høvelte Barracks starting August 2026.
Crown Prince of Denmark

Christian is first in line to the Danish throne and eldest child of King Frederik X. Since the 16th century, first-born sons of Danish monarchs have traditionally been alternately named Frederik and Christian.
He is expected to reign as Christian XI.
Christian's grandmother, Queen Margrethe II, announced her pending abdication on live television in her New Year's Eve address on 31 December 2023.
On 14 January 2024, Prince Christian, the Queen, and Crown Prince Frederik participated in a meeting of the Council of State, with the cabinet ministers and the council of state secretary in attendance.
The moment the Queen signed a declaration of her abdication, Crown Prince Frederik acceded to the Danish throne as King Frederik X. Christian, who became the heir apparent, is referred to as "HRH Crown Prince Christian".
In January 2024, Christian became a regent for the first time during his father's three day state visit to Poland.
Personal life

Christian is godfather to his second cousin, Prince Gustav Albrecht, the son of Gustav, 7th Prince of Sayn-Wittgenstein-Berleburg.
He served as page boy at the 2010 wedding of his godmother, the Crown Princess of Sweden.
Christian is an avid fan of the football club F.C. Copenhagen and has frequently been seen attending their matches.
Titles, styles, honours, and arms

Titles

Honours

National honours

Orders and appointments

Medals and decorations

Foreign honours

Other honours

In 2006 Scandinavian Airlines System was in the process of purchasing new Airbus A319 aircraft and in Christian's honour the first of these, delivered on 8 August 2006, was named Christian Valdemar Viking.
Arms

Crown Prince Christian’s coat of arms is similar to the royal coat of arms except for the heir apparent's crown and the purple mantle.
