The Duchess of Montpensier


The Count of ÉvreuxThe Countess of Évreux


Princess Béatrice


The Duke of OrléansThe Duchess of Orléans


The Dowager Countess of La Marche


The Countess of Schönborn-Buchheim


Princess Hélène, Countess of Limburg Stirum


The Dowager Duchess of Calabria


The Dowager Duchess of Württemberg


Princess Claude, Mrs. Gandolfi


Princess Chantal, Baroness of Sambucy de Sorgue


Princess Claude of Orléans (Claude Marie Agnès Catherine; born 11 December 1943) is a French princess of the House of Orléans.
Biography

Family

Claude was born on 11 December 1943 in Larache, Morocco as the ninth child and fifth daughter of Henri, Count of Paris, Orléanist claimant to the French throne, and Princess Isabelle of Orléans-Braganza.
One of eleven siblings, Claude's eldest brother was Henri, Count of Paris, who succeeded their father as head of the Orléans family, and two of her sisters also became consorts of pretenders to abolished thrones; Anne, Duchess of Calabria and Diane, Duchess of Württemberg.
Marriage and issue

On 22 July 1964 in Sintra, Princess Claude married her second cousin, Prince Amedeo of Savoy, Duke of Aosta.
He was the only son of Prince Aimone, Duke of Aosta, second cousin once removed of Italy's last king, Umberto II.
Aimone was briefly made nominal head of an Italian puppet state during World War II as King Tomislav II of Croatia.
Claude was the third Orleanist princess to hold the title Duchess of Aosta by marriage.
The couple met while attending the wedding of Infante Juan Carlos of Spain and Princess Sophia of Greece and Denmark in May 1962 in Athens.
A Savoy family council having met at King Umberto's residence in exile at Cimiez, France, in the summer of 1963, another was held in London secretly at the king's hospital bedside to discuss the prospect of the king's only son Vittorio Emanuele, Prince of Naples, choosing to marry a commoner, Marina Doria, which had become the subject of much media speculation.
In view of his illness, Amedeo's imminent marriage to a suitable princess, and his son's ongoing relationship with Doria, Umberto contemplated publicly abdicating (having left Italy for exile in 1946 pursuant to an anti-monarchy plebiscite, he had not formally renounced) and recognizing Amedeo as the successor to his claim to Italy's abolished throne.
The wedding was attended by 300 guests, including King Umberto and the Prince and Princess of Spain.
After the duke completed his duties as a naval officer, the couple were given the Borro by Aimone's mother, a large estate in the Tuscan village of San Giustino Valdarno, near Fiesole, Italy, where they cultivated vineyards.
Amedeo was remarried later that year to Silvia Paternò di Spedalotto, while Claude remarried twice: civilly on 27 April 1982 in Port-au-Prince, Haiti with Luigi Arnaldo La Cagnina (divorced in 1996), a television journalist in the United States and Canada, and both civilly and religiously with Enrico Gandolfi in 2006 in Oreno, Milan.
