Princess Beatrice, Mrs Edoardo Mapelli Mozzi (Beatrice Elizabeth Mary; born 8 August 1988), is a member of the British royal family.
She is the elder daughter of Andrew Mountbatten-Windsor and Sarah Ferguson, and a niece of King Charles III.
Born fifth in the line of succession to the British throne, she is ninth as of 2026.
Beatrice was educated at St George's School, Ascot, before reading history at Goldsmiths, University of London, where she graduated with a BA degree.
She has held roles at the Foreign Office and Sony Pictures, and currently serves as Vice-President of Strategic Partnerships at the software company Afiniti.
In 2020, Beatrice married Edoardo Mapelli Mozzi, an English-born property developer with descent from Italian nobility.
Early life and education

Beatrice was born at 8:18 pm on 8 August 1988 at the Portland Hospital in London, to the then Duke and Duchess of York.
She is the fifth grandchild of Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh.
Beatrice was baptised in the Chapel Royal at St James's Palace on 20 December.
Her younger sister, Princess Eugenie, was born in 1990.
Beatrice's parents divorced amicably when she was seven years old and agreed to joint custody of their two children.
After the divorce, the Queen provided her parents with £1.4 million to establish a trust fund for her and Eugenie.
Beatrice and her sister frequently travelled abroad, always with one or both of their parents.
Beatrice began her early education at the independent Upton House School in Windsor in 1991.
Beatrice continued her education at the independent St George's School in Ascot, where she was a pupil from 2000 to 2007.
Beatrice celebrated her 18th birthday with a masked ball at Windsor Castle in July 2006.
In September 2008, Beatrice began a three-year course at Goldsmiths, University of London, to read history and history of ideas, graduating in 2011 with a BA (2:1 degree).
Career

During the summer of 2008, Beatrice obtained work experience as a sales assistant at Selfridges.
Beatrice became the first member of the family to appear in a non-documentary film when she had a small, non-speaking role as an extra in The Young Victoria (2009), based on the accession and early reign of her ancestor Queen Victoria.
In April 2015, it was reported that Beatrice had decided to move to New York City.
By April 2017, she held a full-time job and divided her time between London and New York.
Known professionally as Beatrice York, she served as Vice‐President of Partnerships and Strategy at Afiniti from 2016 to 2025.
In January 2022, it was reported that Beatrice had lost her taxpayer-funded police security in 2011, reportedly after her uncle Charles (then Prince of Wales) intervened as part of a cost-cutting initiative.
In 2025, Beatrice launched Purpose Economy Intelligence Ltd alongside Luis Alvarado Martínez, a Spanish‐born executive who has worked at the World Economic Forum since 2021.
Duties and appointments

Beatrice and Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh accompanied Queen Elizabeth II to the traditional Royal Maundy services on 5 April 2012 in York.
There, Beatrice interacted with parishioners, received flowers from the public, and assisted the Queen in giving Maundy money to the pensioners.
In 2013, Beatrice and her sister promoted Britain overseas in Germany.
She visited the Isle of Wight in 2014, whose former Governor had been her namesake Princess Beatrice, daughter of Queen Victoria.
On 17 September 2022, during the period of official mourning for Queen Elizabeth II, Beatrice joined her sister and six cousins to mount a 15-minute vigil around the late Queen's coffin as it lay in state at Westminster Hall.
Upon the accession of Charles III, her position in the line of succession made Beatrice eligible to be appointed a Counsellor of State.
Personal life

Early relationships

Beatrice briefly dated Paolo Liuzzo in 2006, an Italo-American whose previous charge for assault and battery caused controversy at the time.
Marriage and family

In March 2019, Beatrice attended a fundraising event at the National Portrait Gallery in London accompanied by the Anglo-Italian property developer Edoardo Mapelli Mozzi.
The only son of Alex Mapelli-Mozzi, a former Alpine skier for the Great Britain Olympic team, he is a legitimate male‐line descendant of the Mapelli Mozzi family, whose members were granted the title of Count of the Kingdom of Italy in 1913 by King Victor Emmanuel III, with remainder to all male descendants of Edoardo's great‐grandfather Paolo Mapelli Mozzi (1854–1921).
They attended the May 2019 wedding of Lady Gabriella Windsor, Beatrice's second cousin once removed.
Beatrice and Mapelli Mozzi became engaged in Italy in September 2019, with their betrothal formally announced by Andrew's office on 26 September.
Their wedding was initially scheduled for 29 May 2020 at the Chapel Royal at St James's Palace, followed by a private reception in Buckingham Palace Gardens, but first the reception and then the wedding itself were postponed because of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Beatrice married Mapelli Mozzi in a private ceremony on 17 July 2020 at the Royal Chapel of All Saints, Royal Lodge, Windsor.
Her father's association with Jeffrey Epstein, an American financier and convicted sex offender, also affected the scale of the wedding; following Andrew's widely criticised  BBC interview and subsequent withdrawal from royal duties, the arrangements were significantly reduced.
Although Andrew walked Beatrice down the aisle, he did not appear in the official wedding portraits released by Buckingham Palace.
Beatrice wore a remodelled Sir Norman Hartnell gown lent by the Queen, and the Queen Mary Fringe Tiara, which the Queen had worn at her own wedding.
Beatrice has a stepson, Christopher Woolf ("Wolfie"), from her husband's previous relationship with the architect Dara Huang.
She gave birth to a daughter, Sienna Elizabeth Mapelli Mozzi, on 18 September 2021 at the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital in London.
At birth, Sienna was 11th in line to the British throne, and following the death of Queen Elizabeth II on 8 September 2022, she is now 10th.
She was christened at the Chapel Royal at St James's Palace on 29 April 2022.
Beatrice and her husband initially lived in a four-bedroom apartment at St James's Palace, but reportedly moved to a manor house in the Cotswolds in late 2022.
Beatrice gave birth to their second daughter, Athena Elizabeth Rose, on 22 January 2025 at the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital in London, several weeks prematurely.
She was christened at the Chapel Royal at St James's Palace on 12 December.
Athena is 11th in line to the British throne.
Charity work

In 2002, Beatrice visited children living with HIV in Russia.
In an interview to mark her 18th birthday, Beatrice said she wished to use her position to assist others through charity work; she had already undertaken charitable duties alongside her mother through the various organisations supported by the Duchess.
In April 2010, Beatrice became the first member of the British royal family to complete the London Marathon, running to raise money for Children in Crisis.
She is the patron of Forget-Me-Not Children's Hospice, which supports children with life-shortening conditions in West Yorkshire and North Manchester.
At the April 2011 wedding of her cousin Prince William, Beatrice's unusual fascinator, designed by Philip Treacy, attracted significant public and media attention.
In November 2012, Beatrice became a patron of the York Musical Society.
In 2016, she, her mother, and her sister Eugenie collaborated with the British contemporary artist Teddy McDonald to create the first royal contemporary art painting.
In 2018, Children in Crisis merged with Street Child, a children's charity active in multiple countries, with Beatrice serving as its ambassador.
Beatrice took part in a South Asia Tour in 2016 that lasted nine days.
A few weeks later, she attended the 2016 Asia Game Changer Awards Dinner at the United Nations in New York City, which honoured Ruit and others.
She and Charles Rockefeller presented Ruit with his Asia Society Asia Game Changer Award.
Beatrice is the founder of Big Change, a charity she established with six friends to encourage young people to develop skills "outside a traditional academic curriculum".
Be Nice and gave an interview to Vogue at a House of Lords event, speaking about her own experiences of being bullied for her fashion choices in early adulthood.
In May 2018, she attended the Met Gala in New York City.
In March 2019, Beatrice was elected to the board of the UK charity the Outward Bound Trust as a trustee, after her father succeeded to the royal patronage from his father, the Duke of Edinburgh.
In May 2019, she was honoured at a New York City gala for her work with Friends Without a Border.
In April 2022, in her capacity as an ambassador for the charity Made By Dyslexia, she and her husband took part in the first World Dyslexia Assembly, hosted by Prince Carl Philip of Sweden.
In February 2023, Beatrice was named patron of the British Skin Foundation.
In July 2025, she was appointed patron of the Chartered College of Teaching, a role previously held by her grandfather Prince Philip.
In November 2025, Beatrice was appointed deputy patron of Outward Bound Trust.
Titles, styles, and arms

Titles and styles

As a male-line grandchild of the British sovereign, Beatrice was known at birth as "Her Royal Highness Princess Beatrice of York", the territorial designation deriving from her father's former title, Duke of York.
Since her marriage, she has been styled in the Court Circular as "Her Royal Highness Princess Beatrice, Mrs Edoardo Mapelli Mozzi".
