The Crown PrinceThe Crown Princess


Princess Tomislav


Princess Alexander


Princess Elizabeth


Princess Katarina of Yugoslavia, Lady de Silva (born 28 November 1959) is an English businessperson specialising in etiquette and decorum courses.
Early life

Katarina was born at King’s College Hospital in London to Princess Margarita of Baden and Prince Tomislav of Yugoslavia.
Her father's dynasty having been deposed and banished from Yugoslavia after World War II, she grew up in exile, largely in England.
She has one brother, Prince Nikola of Yugoslavia, and two half-brothers, Prince George and Prince Michael.
She is a first cousin of Alexander, Crown Prince of Yugoslavia.
Her grandmother, Princess Theodora, Margravine of Baden, was the sister of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, late husband of Queen Elizabeth II.
Princess Katharina is the senior female-line descendant of Queen Victoria, through the Queen's second daughter Alice, Grand Duchess of Hesse, who was the grandmother of Princess Katharina's great-grandmother, Princess Alice of Battenberg.
Career

In 1978, Katarina was presented as a debutante to high society at the International Debutante Ball at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.
As of 2013, Katarina and former Royal butler Grant Harrold develop and sell etiquette and decorum classes.
Personal life

Katarina married barrister Sir Desmond de Silva on 5 December 1987.
They had one daughter, Victoria Marie Esmé Margarita, born on 6 September 1991.
Charity work

In 2009, Katarina supported the charity Project Change: Bermuda to raise funds towards building a hospital and training medical staff in Burundi.
Katarina served as the president of the Guild of Travel and Tourism in the United Kingdom.
In 2013, she became patron of the Society of Genealogists succeeding Prince Michael of Kent.
Honours

Ancestry

Katarina is a member of the House of Karađorđević.
Through her father, Katarina descends from kings Nicholas I of Montenegro, Ferdinand I of Romania, and furthermore from Emperor Nicholas I of Russia, King Ferdinand II and Queen Maria II of Portugal, and Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.
Through her mother, Katarina descends from Leopold, Grand Duke of Baden, kings George V of Hanover, Christian IX of Denmark, George I of Greece and Nicholas I, Emperor of Russia.
