Princess Alexandra, The Honourable Lady Ogilvy (Alexandra Helen Elizabeth Olga Christabel; born 25 December 1936), is a member of the British royal family.
She is the only daughter of Prince George, Duke of Kent, and Princess Marina of Greece and Denmark, the only living granddaughter of George V, a niece of Edward VIII and George VI, and a first cousin of Elizabeth II.
Alexandra's mother was also a first cousin of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, consort of Elizabeth II, making her both a second cousin and first cousin once removed of Charles III.
Alexandra was married to the businessman Sir Angus Ogilvy from 1963 until his death in 2004.
Early life

Alexandra was born at 11:20 am on Christmas Day 1936 at 3 Belgrave Square, London, the second child and only daughter of Prince George, Duke of Kent, the fourth son of King George V and Queen Mary, and Princess Marina of Greece and Denmark, a daughter of Prince Nicholas of Greece and Denmark and Grand Duchess Elena Vladimirovna of Russia.
She was named after her paternal great-grandmother, Queen Alexandra; her grandmother, Grand Duchess Elena Vladimirovna of Russia; and both of her maternal aunts, Countess Elizabeth of Törring-Jettenbach and Princess Olga of Yugoslavia.
She received the name Christabel because she was born on Christmas Day, like her aunt Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester.
As a male-line granddaughter of the British monarch, she was styled as a British princess with the prefix Her Royal Highness.
At the time of her birth she was sixth in the line of succession to the British throne, behind her cousins Princess Elizabeth (later Queen Elizabeth II) and Princess Margaret, her uncle the Duke of Gloucester, her father the Duke of Kent, and her elder brother Prince Edward.
She was born two weeks after the abdication of her uncle King Edward VIII.
Alexandra was baptised in the Private Chapel at Buckingham Palace on 9 February 1937, and her godparents were King George VI and Queen Elizabeth (her paternal uncle and aunt); the Queen of Norway (her great-aunt); Princess Nicholas of Greece and Denmark (her maternal grandmother); Princess Olga of Yugoslavia (her maternal aunt); Princess Beatrice (her paternal great-great-aunt); the Earl of Athlone (her paternal great-uncle); and Count Karl Theodor of Törring-Jettenbach (her maternal uncle by marriage).
Alexandra spent most of her childhood at her family's country house, Coppins, in Buckinghamshire.
Alexandra has the distinction of being the first British princess to have attended a boarding school, Heathfield School near Ascot.
Marriage and personal life

On 24 April 1963, Alexandra married The Hon.
Angus James Bruce Ogilvy (1928–2004), the second son of David Ogilvy, 12th Earl of Airlie, and Lady Alexandra Coke, at Westminster Abbey.
Ogilvy presented Alexandra with an engagement ring made of a cabochon sapphire set in gold and surrounded by diamonds on both sides.
Alexandra travelled with her brother, the Duke of Kent, from Kensington Palace to the Abbey.
The bridesmaids included Princess Anne and Archduchess Elisabeth of Austria, and the best man was Peregrine Fairfax.
Ogilvy declined the Queen's offer to be created an earl upon marriage, so the couple's children carry no titles.
Ogilvy was knighted in 1988 (when Alexandra assumed the style of The Hon.
Lady Ogilvy), and was sworn of the Privy Council in 1997.
Alexandra and Ogilvy had two children:


Marina's first pregnancy, announced in late 1989, caused controversy as the couple were not married.
The situation led to a feud with her parents, who suggested that Marina either marry her companion in a shotgun wedding or have an abortion.
In an interview with a tabloid at the time, Marina claimed that her parents had cut off her trust fund and monthly allowance due to their disapproval of her conduct.
Marina's parents denied her allegations, stating that they loved her, had not cut her off, and that she was welcome at home at any time.
Activities

Beginning in the late 1950s, Alexandra undertook an extensive programme of engagements in support of the Queen, both in the United Kingdom and overseas.
The "Alexandra Waltz" was composed for the visit by radio announcer Russ Tyson and television musical director Clyde Collins, and was sung for the princess by the teenage Gay Kahler, who later performed under the name Gay Kayler.
In 1961, Alexandra visited Hong Kong, including stops at Aberdeen Fish Market, Lok Ma Chau police station, and So Uk Estate, a public housing complex.
The Princess Alexandra Hospital in Brisbane is named in her honour.
Alexandra represented the Queen when Nigeria gained independence from the United Kingdom on 1 October 1960, and she opened the first Parliament on 3 October.
Alexandra opened the new hospital in Harlow, Essex, named in her honour, on 27 April 1965.
The Princess Alexandra Hospital NHS Trust was announced by the Prime Minister, Boris Johnson, in September 2019 as part of the government's new health infrastructure programme to build a replacement hospital.
Alexandra is an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow, the Faculty of Anaesthetists of the Royal College of Surgeons of England, the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, and the Royal College of Physicians.
She is president of Alexandra Rose Day, founded in honour of her great-grandmother, Queen Alexandra, and was patron of The Royal School, Hampstead.
Until its abolition in 2013, she received £225,000 per year from the Civil List to cover the cost of official expenses, although, as with other members of the royal family (except the Duke of Edinburgh), the Queen repaid this amount to HM Treasury.
Alexandra lives at Thatched House Lodge in Richmond, London, a Crown property purchased on a 150-year lease from the Crown Estate Commissioners by Angus Ogilvy after their wedding in 1963.
She has been patron of the Royal Alexandra Children's Hospital in Brighton since 1954 and of Alzheimer's Society since 1990.
Alexandra is also the royal patron of Children and Families Across Borders (CFAB), a charity dedicated to reuniting children separated from their families.
In November 2016, one month before Alexandra's 80th birthday, the Queen held a reception at Buckingham Palace in honour of her charitable work.
In February 2024, she began using a wheelchair and attended a thanksgiving service for Constantine II of Greece later that month.
In April 2026, Alexandra attended a commemorative reception held to mark the centenary of Queen Elizabeth II's birth.
Titles, styles, honours and arms

Titles and styles

Alexandra is often referred to simply as Her Royal Highness Princess Alexandra.
She has held the following styles officially:


Honours

Eponyms

Appointments

Honorary military appointments

Arms

Issue

Ancestry

Since Princess Alexandra's mother was a first cousin of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, she is a second cousin to King Charles III and his siblings, in addition to being their first cousin once removed because her father was Queen Elizabeth II's uncle.
