Princess Beatrix*


Princess Margriet*Pieter van Vollenhoven*


Prince Bernhard Lucas Emmanuel of Orange-Nassau, van Vollenhoven (born 25 December 1969) is a Dutch racing driver, entrepreneur and member of the Dutch royal family.
He is the second son of Princess Margriet of the Netherlands and Pieter van Vollenhoven.
With Willem-Alexander's succession however, he is no longer a member of the Dutch Royal House, and is no longer in line to direct succession to the Dutch throne, but still retains his membership of the Dutch royal family 


Early life and education

Bernhard was born on 25 December 1969 in Nijmegen in the Netherlands.
He is the second son of Princess Margriet and Pieter van Vollenhoven.
He has three brothers: Princes Maurits, Pieter-Christiaan, and Floris.
Subsequently, in 1989 he attended Groningen University in the Netherlands where he studied marketing and market research.
Business

Bernhard is a self-employed entrepreneur.
In 2002, the name Ritzen Koeriers was changed to Logistieke Meesters, at which time Bernhard was no longer involved in the business.
Marriage and family

While studying in Groningen, Bernhard met Annette Sekrève, (born 18 April 1972).
They have three children: Isabella Lily Juliana (born 2002), Samuel Bernhard Louis (born 2004), and Benjamin Pieter Floris (born 2008).
According to a royal decree of 5 July 2000, the children were granted the family name van Vollenhoven, without titles.
In January 2026, Bernhard and Annette announced that they were to divorce.
Upon the announcement of the planned abdication of Queen Beatrix, which took place on 30 April 2013, it was also restated that after the abdication, the children of Princess Margriet and Pieter van Vollenhoven would no longer be eligible for the throne.
Health

Bernhard has been receiving treatment for Crohn's disease since 2002.
Ancestry

References

External links

2 gave up the title "Prince of the Netherlands, but still held the title "Prince of Orange-Nassau"
3 title granted by Royal Decree to descendants of Princess Irene
