India Amanda Caroline Hicks (born 5 September 1967) is a British designer, writer, businesswoman and former fashion model.
After graduating from the New England School of Photography, Hicks became an interior designer and a model for Ralph Lauren, among others.
Hicks travels frequently to disaster sites in her role with the non-profit organisation Global Empowerment Mission.
A daughter of Lady Pamela Hicks, she is a maternal descendant of the House of Mountbatten and a relative of the British royal family.
Early life

India Amanda Caroline Hicks was born on 5 September 1967 in Lambeth, London.
Hicks is the third child of Lady Pamela Mountbatten and David Nightingale Hicks.
Her mother was a lady-in-waiting to Queen Elizabeth II and her father was a famous interior designer.
She is the granddaughter of the 1st Earl and Countess Mountbatten of Burma and the second cousin and goddaughter of Charles III.
Hicks grew up in Oxfordshire, England.
Hicks was exposed to design at an early age through her father and brother, who were both architects.
The 11-year-old Hicks was on holiday in Ireland in 1979 when her grandfather was killed by a bomb planted on his boat.
In 1981, she served as bridesmaid to Lady Diana Spencer at her wedding to Prince Charles.
Hicks went to boarding school in Scotland at Gordonstoun, from which she was expelled for having boys in her room.
She then backpacked across India.
Hicks moved to Boston, Massachusetts at age 18 to study photography at the New England School of Photography, where she graduated in 1990.
Career

After graduating college, Hicks' father introduced her to Emilio Pucci in Florence, Italy, where she modelled swimsuits.
Hicks moved to the Bahamas in 1996.
In the Bahamas, Hicks restored homes, invested and remodelled a hotel, and published several books on design and lifestyle.
Hicks also started a boutique shop in the Bahamas called the Sugar Mill Trading Company with business partner Linda Griffin.
From 2005 to 2014, Hicks worked with Crabtree & Evelyn as a spokeswoman and creative consultant for home and skincare products.
The company created the India Hicks Island Living and India Hicks Island Night lines of soaps, candles, and perfumes.
In 2008, Hicks co-hosted the second season of the Bravo interior design show Top Design in Los Angeles, California.
Hicks also became a public commentator on events surrounding the royal family and the 2011 wedding of Prince William and Catherine Middleton.
In 2015, Hicks created an e-commerce venture called India Hicks Inc. with partners Nicholas Keuper and HauteLook.
Hicks also worked with the Home Shopping Network on a line of bedding products called India Hicks Island Living.
Personal life

Hicks met her husband David Flint Wood as a child.
He was previously in a relationship with her cousin, Lady Helen Windsor and then Susannah Constantine, a fashion journalist and the former girlfriend of her other cousin, David Armstrong-Jones, 2nd Earl of Snowdon.
India and David re-connected as adults during a holiday in the Bahamas.
The couple have a house, "America Farm" in Ewelme, Oxfordshire, built on land that Hicks had inherited and replacing two redundant farm workers' cottages.
Hicks' book about the project, India Hicks:
Hicks has competed in several marathons.
In 2020, Hicks pleaded guilty at Uxbridge Magistrates' Court to shoplifting a coat and was ordered to pay costs and a victim surcharge.
Her spokesperson stated: "The court accepted that at the time of taking the coat, India had simply been absent-minded and hadn't intended to leave without paying for it".
