Bertrand of Orléans-Braganza (born 2 February 1941) is the current head of the Vassouras branch of the House of Orléans-Braganza and one of the two principal claimants to the defunct Brazilian throne.
He assumed the position on 15 July 2022, following the death of his elder brother, Luiz of Orléans-Braganza.
The Vassouras branch asserts its claim in opposition to the Petrópolis branch of the Orléans-Braganzas, headed by Pedro Carlos.
Both Bertrand and Pedro Carlos are great-grandsons of Isabel, Princess Imperial of Brazil, daughter and heir of Emperor Pedro II, of the House of Braganza.
Born in Mandelieu-la-Napoule, France, the third child of Pedro Henrique of Orléans-Braganza, and Princess Maria Elisabeth of Bavaria.
Prince Bertrand is an avid traditionalist conservative, anticommunist, and outspoken advocate of right-wing Christian policies.
Although Prince Bertrand and Prince Pedro Carlos are great-grandsons of Emperor Pedro II of Brazil, of the House of Braganza, they disputed the leadership of the Brazilian Imperial Family due to a dynastic dispute regarding their parents, who were cousins.
A member of the Brazilian Imperial House, Prince Bertrand is closely related to the House of Braganza and the House of Orléans (Orleanist claimants), both through his paternal lineage, and with the House of Wittelsbach, through his maternal lineage.
He is the great-grandson of Isabel, Princess Imperial of Brazil and King Ludwig III of Bavaria.
Biography

Early life

The third son of Pedro Henrique of Orléans-Braganza and Princess Maria Elisabeth of Bavaria, his elder brothers are, in order, Luiz of Orléans-Braganza who claimed to be Head of the Brazilian Imperial Family until 2022 and Eudes of Orléans-Braganza, who renounced his dynastic rights to the Brazilian throne in order to marry a commoner.
As with his two elder brothers, Bertrand was born in southern France, 1941, even though the exile imposed on the family had already been revoked, in 1920, due to the Second World War.
Later his family moved to Paraná, where his father bought a farm and Bertrand spent his childhood.
Bertrand is a Traditionalist Catholic and a member of Tradition, Family and Property, of traditionalist Catholic inspiration, founded and directed by the intellectual leader Plinio Corrêa de Oliveira until his death.
Besides Portuguese, his native language, Bertrand is fluent in French and Spanish.
Roles

In recent years, Bertrand is coordinator and spokesman of the movement Paz no Campo (Peace in the fields), and has traveled all over Brazil lecturing for farmers and entrepreneurs in defense of private property and free enterprise.
As the activist and spokesman of the Brazilian Imperial House for the restoration of the monarchy, Bertrand has gained prominence in the national media and, on some occasions, international media, with the rise and spread of monarchist movements throughout the country.
On 22 September 2017 Bertrand participated in the program The Noite com Danilo Gentili, currently the largest talk show in the country, breaking the program's record of audience.
Political opinions

Bertrand supports typically Traditionalist Catholic ideas: he opposes same-sex marriage, favours the illegality of abortion and is against the demarcation of indigenous territory in Brazil.
Honours

As Head of the Brazilian Imperial Family, Bertrand claims the following positions:


Bertrand has also received other honours:


Ancestry

References

External links
