Prince Richard of Hesse (Richard Wilhelm Leopold; 14
May 1901 – 11 February 1969) was a German prince and politician.
Early life

Prince Richard and his twin brother Christoph were born on 14 May 1901 in Frankfurt am Main, in Prussian Hesse as the fifth son Prince Frederick Charles of Hesse and his wife Princess Margaret of Prussia.
His great-grandmother was Queen Victoria, his mother was the youngest sister of Emperor Wilhelm II.
Richard, affectionately nicknamed "Ri" by his family, grew up in a loving and close-knit family.
Career and later life

The First World War and the fall of the imperial regime

Too young to be mobilized when the First World War broke out, Richard and Prince Christoph of Hesse-Kassel spent most of the conflict in Kronberg, where they were educated at the Reform Realgymnasium.
Unlike his twin brother, who did not take the exam, Richard obtained the abitur in 1920.
Closely linked to the former Kaiser Wilhelm II, whose sister was Princess Margaret, the Hesse-Kassel were then attacked by the revolutionaries.
In this unstable context, Richard and Christoph engage as auxiliaries (hilfsdient) to protect the transports passing through Kronberg while awaiting the arrival of the French occupation troops.
Training and love life

After World War I, Richard studied civil engineering and mechanical engineering at the Darmstadt University of Technology.
From a sentimental point of view, Richard fell in love with Princess Sophie of Greece and Denmark, met around 1927.
However, she fell in love with Richard's twin brother Prince Christoph of Hesse-Kassel, and it is the latter that she married, in 1930.
Adherence to Nazism

Like his three brothers, Richard was enthusiastic about Nazism.
In 1932, the prince thus joined simultaneously the SA and the NSDAP.
Subsequently, Richard became a general (Obergruppenführer) in the Nationalsozialistisches Kraftfahrkorps (NSKK), a special unit of the SA corps, and obtained leadership of the Motorgruppe Hessen in 1935.
From a more political point of view, the prince ran, without success, in the German parliamentary elections of March 1936 and April 1938.
The Second World War and its consequences

Prince Richard enlisted in the German Army shortly after the outbreak of the Second World War.
HAS following the strengthening of the "decree of the princes", Richard was however informed of his dismissal from the army by the Reichsleiter Martin Bormann in October 1943.
At the same time, his older brother Philippe and his sister-in-law Mafalda of Italy were arrested by the Hitler regime while his twin brother, Prince Christoph of Hesse-Kassel, died in a plane crash.
Post-war and its consequences

The defeat of Germany and its occupation by the Allies brought new difficulties to Richard's life.
Arrested by the Americans shortly after the capitulation of his country, the prince was interned for sixteen months in the camp of Moosburg, in Bavaria.
Several months later, the prince underwent a denazification trial.
Meanwhile, the jewels of the House of Hesse-Kassel were stolen by American officers in 1946 and only 10% of the stolen objects were finally returned to their rightful owners, in 1951.
Later years

After the Second World War, Richard assisted his brother Prince Wolfgang of Hesse for a while in the management of the Hessische Hausstiftung.
Subsequently, he was appointed to the traffic surveillance of the state of Hesse.
In the same years, Richard of Hesse-Kassel joined the spiritual movement of “Moral Rearmament”, founded by the Lutheran pastor Frank Buchman.
Prince Richard died in 1969.
