King Juan Carlos IQueen Sofía


The Duchess of Soria and HernaniThe Duke of Soria and Hernani


The Dowager Duchess of Calabria


Infanta Cristina (Cristina Federica Victoria Antonia de la Santísima Trinidad de Borbón y de Grecia, born 13 June 1965) is the younger daughter of King Juan Carlos I and his wife, Queen Sofía.
She is sixth in the line of succession to the Spanish throne, after her brother King Felipe VI's children, her sister Infanta Elena, Duchess of Lugo, and Elena's children Felipe and Victoria.
On 26 September 1997, on the occasion of her marriage to handball player Iñaki Urdangarin, she was created Duchess of Palma de Mallorca by her father, King Juan Carlos.
Cristina represented the Crown during the reign of her father.
Early life

Cristina de Borbón was born on 13 June 1965 at Our Lady of Loreto Sanatorium, now known as ORPEA Madrid Loreto in Madrid and was baptized into the Church at the Palacio de La Zarzuela by the Archbishop of Madrid.
Her godparents were Alfonso, Duke of Anjou and Cádiz (her first cousin once removed), and Infanta Maria Cristina (great-aunt).
Marriage and children

Cristina married team handball player Iñaki Urdangarin at Barcelona Cathedral on 4 October 1997.
On this occasion, she was created Duchess of Palma de Mallorca for life.
On 24 January 2022, Cristina and Urdangarin announced their separation.
Activities and personal work

Cristina started to attend official events at a very young age.
Since finishing her most basic education in 1983, Cristina, along with her sister Elena, supported their parents representing the Crown at official events such as the National Day, the wedding of Princess Astrid of Belgium, the re-burial of Queen Victoria Eugenia at El Escorial, and the state visit of Mexican president Miguel de la Madrid to Spain, among others.
After the corruption scandal of her husband, the Duchess and her husband distanced themselves from the royal family, their last official event was on 12 October 2011.
Regarding her personal work, Cristina has been working for La Caixa Foundation since October 1993.
In April 2013, Infanta Cristina was formally named as a suspect in the case by the judge in charge.
The infanta made her first appearance in the Majorca Court on 8 February 2014, where she denied any knowledge of her husband's dealings.
Spanish judge Jose Castro formalised charges against Infanta Cristina on 25 June 2014.
On 22 December 2014 the High Court of the Balearic Islands announced that Infanta Cristina, her husband, and 15 others would stand trial on tax fraud charges "as soon as next year".
On 12 June 2015, King Felipe VI officially deprived his sister of her dukedom, privately announcing his intention beforehand.
After this decision was made public, Cristina's lawyer, Miquel Roca, declared that the king's decision followed a formal request from the infanta, although the Royal Household denied it, saying that her renunciation to the title was after the king's private phone call to communicate her the decision.
Her right of succession to the throne, and to the royal title of infanta were unaffected.
Cristina's trial began on 11 January 2016, presided over by three judges in Palma de Mallorca.
Titles, styles, honours and arms

Titles and styles

As a child of a Spanish monarch, Cristina is entitled to the designation and rank of infanta (princess) with the style of Royal Highness.
On the occasion of her marriage in 1997, she was created Duchess of Palma de Mallorca.
