Amélie of Orléans (French: Marie Amélie Louise Hélène; 28 September 1865 – 25 October 1951) was the last Queen of Portugal as the wife of Carlos I of Portugal.
She was regent of Portugal during the absence of her husband in 1895.
She was the eldest daughter of Prince Philippe, Count of Paris, and Princess Marie Isabelle d'Orléans, and a "Princess of Orléans" by birth.
Amélie's paternal grandparents were Prince Ferdinand Philippe, Duke of Orléans, and Duchess Helena of Mecklenburg-Schwerin.
Her maternal grandparents were Prince Antoine, Duke of Montpensier, and the Infanta Luisa Fernanda of Spain.
The Dukes of Orléans and Montpensier were siblings, both sons of King Louis-Philippe I of France, and Maria Amalia of the Two Sicilies.
Marriage and issue

On 22 May 1886, Amélie married Carlos, Prince Royal of Portugal.
He was the eldest son of King Luís I of Portugal and Maria Pia of Savoy.
At first, the marriage was not popular and Queen Maria Pia was expecting to marry Carlos to Archduchess Marie Valerie of Austria, Princess Mathilde of Saxony, Princess Viktoria of Prussia or Princess Victoria of Wales.
However, Amélie and Carlos came to live quite harmoniously with each other.
They had three children:


Queen consort

On 19 October 1889, King Luís died and Carlos succeeded him on the throne.
Amélie became the new Queen consort of Portugal.
Amélie played an active role as a queen, and somewhat softened the growing criticism towards the monarchy with her personal popularity, though she did receive some criticism for her expenses.
In 1892, Pope Leo XIII gave a Golden Rose to Amélie.
On their way to the Palace of Necessidades, the carriage carrying Carlos and his family passed through the Rua do Arsenal.
The King died immediately, his heir Prince Dom Luís Filipe was mortally wounded and Infante Dom Manuel was hit in the arm.
Queen Amélie remained unharmed as she tried to defend her youngest son, the new king Manuel II, with the flower bouquet she kept in her hand.
About twenty minutes later, Prince Luís Filipe died and the next day Manuel was acclaimed King of Portugal, the last of the Braganza dynasty.
Manuel II was deposed in a military coup, later known as the 5 October 1910 revolution, which resulted in the establishment of the Portuguese First Republic.
Queen Amélie left Portugal with the rest of the royal family and went into exile.
During the Second World War, the Portuguese government invited her to return to Portugal, but she declined the offer.
She visited Portugal for the last time in 1945.
Later years and death

In 1949, Amélie left her Portuguese possessions to her godson, Duarte Pio, Duke of Braganza, at the request of Prime Minister António de Oliveira Salazar.
She was given a state funeral and buried at the Pantheon of the Braganzas located in the Monastery of São Vicente de Fora, in Lisbon, Portugal.
