Princess Katherine of Greece and Denmark (Greek: Αικατερίνη; 4 May 1913 – 2 October 2007), styled in the United Kingdom as Lady Katherine Brandram from 1947 until 2007, was the third daughter and youngest child of King Constantine I of Greece and Princess Sophia of Prussia.
Early life

Katherine was born on 4 May 1913 in the Royal Palace in Athens, a few weeks after her paternal grandfather, King George I of Greece, was assassinated in Thessaloniki.
Her godparents were Olga Constantinovna (the Dowager Queen of Greece, her paternal grandmother), Alexandra (the Dowager Queen of the United Kingdom, her paternal grandfather's sister and her maternal grandmother's sister-in-law), George V (the King of the United Kingdom, her mother's maternal cousin and her father's paternal cousin), Wilhelm II, German Emperor (her maternal uncle), The Greek Navy (represented by the Minister of Marine) and The Greek Army (represented by the Minister of War).
Katherine had five siblings – three brothers (George, Alexander and Paul, each of whom would become King of the Hellenes) and two sisters (Princess Helen, who married Crown Prince Carol of Romania, and Princess Irene who married Prince Aimone of Savoy, Duke of Spoleto).
They were reinstated following Alexander's death in 1920, but Constantine abdicated again in 1922.
The family moved to Villa Sparta in Florence, where Katherine took up painting.
Her second brother George became King George II in 1922, but was deposed in 1924.
Katherine was educated in England, at a boarding school at Broadstairs and then North Foreland Lodge.
She and the future Elizabeth II were bridesmaids at the wedding of her first cousin, Princess Marina, to Prince George in 1934.
Return to Greece and marriage

Her brother George was reinstated as king in 1935, and Katherine returned to Greece with her sister, Irene.
In 1941, after Greece had been overrun by Axis forces, she fled to South Africa with her third brother, Paul, in a Sunderland flying boat, where she worked as a nurse at a hospital in Cape Town.
On 1 April at the Royal Palace, three weeks prior to the wedding, her brother King George had a stroke and died shortly after in Katherine's presence.
George was succeeded on the Greek throne by Katherine's third brother Paul, who acted as best man at the wedding, which took place according to schedule on 21 April 1947.
On 25 August 1947, King George VI granted her the rank and title of a duke's daughter and she became known as Lady Katherine Brandram.
According to her obituary in The Daily Telegraph, "Lady Katherine lived quietly but remained in close touch with her own and the British royal families.
She attended the Queen's wedding to Prince Philip (her first cousin on her father’s side and second cousin once removed on her mother’s side), and was a guest at the service to mark Prince Philip's 80th birthday at St George's Chapel, Windsor, in 2001.
"


After the death of Infanta Beatriz of Spain in 2002, Katherine was the last surviving great-granddaughter of Queen Victoria, as well the last surviving grandchild of Frederick III, German Emperor and Victoria, Princess Royal.
Count Carl Johan Bernadotte of Sweden (31 October 1916 – 5 May 2012) as Queen Victoria's last living great-grandchild.
From the time of the death of her eldest sister Queen Helen, Queen Mother of Romania in 1982, to the time of her own death, she was Queen Victoria's most senior female line descendant.
Her death marked the end of all female-line direct descendants of Frederick III, German Emperor and Victoria, Princess Royal.
Issue

Princess Katherine of Greece and Denmark and Major Richard Campbell Andrew Brandram had one child, a son:


Bibliography

Ancestry

References

External links

@media screen{html.skin-theme-clientpref-night .mw-parser-output .sister-inline-image img{filter:invert(1)brightness(55%)contrast(250%)hue-rotate(180deg)}}@media screen and (prefers-color-scheme:dark){html.skin-theme-clientpref-os .mw-parser-output .sister-inline-image img{filter:invert(1)brightness(55%)contrast(250%)hue-rotate(180deg)}} Media related to Princess Katherine of Greece and Denmark at Wikimedia Commons
