Princess Irene of Greece and Denmark (Greek: Ειρήνη, romanized: Iríni; 11 May 1942 – 15 January 2026) was the youngest child and second daughter of King Paul of Greece and his wife, Queen Frederica.
She was the younger sister of Queen Sofía of Spain and King Constantine II of Greece.
From 1981 until her death, Irene lived permanently in Spain, becoming a part of the wider Spanish royal family as Queen Sofía's sister, to whose family she remained very close.
Early life

Irene was born on 11 May 1942 in Cape Town, Union of South Africa, where her parents were living in exile because of the German invasion of Greece during the Second World War.
She was the younger daughter of Paul, Crown Prince of Greece (later King Paul), and his wife Frederica of Hanover.
She was christened three weeks after her birth at her parents' Claremont rented home by the Metropolitan of the Holy Archdiocese of Johannesburg and Pretoria and was named after her paternal aunt Princess Irene, Duchess of Aosta.
She had ten godparents, including General Jan Smuts, Lady Katherine Brandram (her paternal aunt), King George II of Greece (her paternal uncle), Queen Mary of the United Kingdom, and the Duchess of Kent (her paternal first cousin once removed).
In 1944 the family moved to Egypt and returned to Greece in 1946 after the approval of the continuity of the Greek monarchy in the referendum with her uncle George II.
Irene was educated at Arsakion school at Psykhikó Palace in Greece and at Schule Schloss Salem in Baden-Württemberg, Germany.
Irene took up the piano in 1962.
As a young woman, Irene was courted by Prince Michel, Count of Évreux, younger son of the Orléanist pretender Henri, Count of Paris, until he met and later married a French noblewoman without his father's consent in 1967.
She was also rumoured to be a potential bride of Crown Prince Harald of Norway (later King Harald V) who later married Sonja Haraldsen in 1968.
Irene was one of the bridesmaids at the wedding of Spanish Prince Juan Carlos and Princess Sofía in 1962.
Her brother Constantine became King in 1964 after the death of their father.
Between her father's death and the birth of her niece Princess Alexia, Irene was heiress presumptive to the Greek throne.
Exile and later life

After her brother was dethroned in the Colonels' coup of 21 April 1967, Irene and the Royal Family moved to Italy after Constantine's unsuccessful countercoup against the junta.
With her mother Irene resided in Rome.
As Mahadevan grew frailer, he dictated his memoirs to Irene.
After her mother's death in 1981, she lived in Spain in an apartment at the Palace of Zarzuela in Madrid, the residence of her sister and brother-in-law, Queen Sofía and King Juan Carlos.
In the 1980s, during the BSE outbreak, Irene arranged for thousands of surplus cows from Europe and the United States to be shipped to India where they evaded slaughter.
During the 1981 Spanish coup attempt, Irene was at the Palace of Zarzuela with King Juan Carlos and her sister Queen Sofia; years later, she recounted the fear they both experienced when remembering the coup in Greece years earlier.
Irene accompanied Sofia in her official duties albeit discreetly.
In 2007, her biography Irene of Greece, the Rebel Princess was published.
On 16 March 2018, Irene obtained Spanish nationality and renounced her Greek nationality.
Personal life

Irene never married and had a passion for piano and archaeology.
With Sofía, they excavated the sites of the ancient village of Decelea and both, together with archaeologist Theophanó A. Arvanitopoulou, wrote two essays.
In 2000, Irene donated a selection of rare books and archaeological artefacts from the family collection to the Benaki Museum.
After the death of her father Paul, Irene became vegetarian.
In November 2023 it was made public that Irene was suffering from cognitive impairment.
Irene's last public appearance was at the wedding of her nephew and godson Prince Nikolaos in February 2025 in Athens.
In the summer of that year, her illness worsened, so she withdrew from public activities in which she accompanied her sister Queen Sofia, who adapted her schedule to Irene's condition.
On 13 January 2026, the Spanish Royal Household announced her condition had worsened and Queen Sofía cancelled all her public engagements to be at her side.
She died at the Palace of Zarzuela in Madrid, Spain, on 15 January, at the age of 83.
After private services at the Palace of Zarzuela, Irene's body—escorted by the Royal Guard—was laid in repose at the Cathedral of St Andrew and St Demetrius in Madrid on 17 January.
