Princess Alexia of Greece and Denmark (Greek: Αλεξία Ντε Γκρες, romanized: Alexía de Grèce; born 10 July 1965) is the eldest child of Constantine II and Anne-Marie, who were King and Queen of Greece from 1964 until the abolition of the monarchy in 1973.
Biography

Alexia was born on 10 July 1965 at Mon Repos, a villa on the Greek island of Corfu used at the time as a summer residence by the Greek royal family.
She was the first child born to the then King Constantine II and Queen Anne-Marie of the Hellenes.
At the time of her birth, her father was King of Greece, her grandfather was King of Denmark, and her great-grandfather was King of Sweden.
As the monarch's only child, between her own birth and the birth on 20 May 1967 of her brother Pavlos, Alexia was heir presumptive to the throne of the Hellenes, then an extant monarchy.
The Greek Constitution of 1952 had changed Greece's order of succession to the throne from the previous Salic law, prevalent in much of the continent, and which precluded the succession of women, to male-preference primogeniture, which accorded succession to the throne to a female member of a dynasty if she has no brothers, similar to the then extant succession laws of the United Kingdom, Denmark and Spain.
Alexia grew up in exile and was raised in between Rome and London.
The family then briefly moved to Denmark and stayed at Amalienborg Palace, and then to London the following year.
Prior to Alexia's education at the Hellenic College of London, she attended the Miss Surtee's School for Boys and Girls in Rome, Italy.
Οn 20 December 2024, Alexia along with other members of the former royal family acquired Greek citizenship, under the surname "de Grèce".
Marriage and children

Queen Anne-Marie


Queen Sofía of Spain


Marina, consort of Prince Michael


On 9 July 1999, Alexia married Carlos Javier Morales Quintana, an architect and a champion yachtsman, at St. Sophia Cathedral, London.
In May 1999, two months before their wedding, Alexia and Carlos were involved in a yachting accident on a boat named the Alexia.
Alexia and Carlos were the only two people out of the thirteen on board to be injured.
Alexia suffered a broken collarbone and Carlos a fractured kneecap.
At her wedding, Alexia wore a gown by the Austrian designer Inge Sprawson.
Alexia's mother, Anne-Marie, and grandmother, Ingrid, had both also worn the same tiara on their own wedding day.
Her attendants included her sister Princess Theodora, her niece Princess Maria-Olympia, and Princess Mafalda, daughter of Kyril, Prince of Preslav, a son of former King Simeon of Bulgaria.
The couple have four children: 


Their children's last names are "Morales y de Grecia", which translates to "Morales and of Greece", taking their father's surname and their mother's royal title.
Alexia and her family now live in her husband's native land, at Puerto Calero marina, Yaiza, Lanzarote in the Canary Islands, in a house designed by her husband.
The Canary Islands are an autonomous community of Spain, where Alexia's aunt, Queen Sofía, lives and first cousin, Felipe VI, lives and rules.
