Prince Adam Karol Czartoryski (.mw-parser-output .IPA-label-small{font-size:85%}.mw-parser-output .references .IPA-label-small,.mw-parser-output .infobox .IPA-label-small,.mw-parser-output .navbox .IPA-label-small{font-size:100%}Polish: ; Spanish: Adán Carlos, IPA:  born 2 January 1940) is a Polish and Spanish aristocrat who is head of the Polish-Lithuanian House of Czartoryski.
In 2016, he sold the family art collection held in the Czartoryski Museum to the Polish state for approximately €100 million.
Origins

Adam Karol Czartoryski is the son of Prince Augustyn Józef Czartoryski (1907–1946) and his wife, Princess María de los Dolores of Bourbon-Two Sicilies.
He is the head of the Polish House of Czartoryski, descendants of Gediminas (died 1341), ruler of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania.
The Czartoryski rose to power under August Aleksander Czartoryski (1697–1782) of the Klewa line, who married Countess Zofia von Dönhoff, the only heir to the Sieniawski family.
The Czartoryski and the Potocki were the two most influential aristocratic families of the last decades of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth (1569–1795).
The Gestapo arrested Prince Augustyn and Princess Dolores, who was pregnant with Prince Adam Karol.
Adam Karol Czartoryski was born on 2 January 1940 in Seville, Spain.
Adam Karol's brother Ludwik Piotr was born in 1945.
Prince Augustyn and Ludwik Piotr both died in 1946 and were buried in the crypt of the Silesian Church in Seville.
Adam Karol Czartoryski was educated in Spain and then in England.
Returning to his native Spain at the end of the sixties, Czartoryski continued his Karate training  under the guidance of Japanese Sensei Yasunari Ishimi.
Czartoryski was director of several international karate organizations.
In 1976 the Chinese government gave sports medals to Adam Czartoryski Bourbon and Fernando Compte, president of the Spanish Wrestling Association.
In 1982 Czartoryski was elected vice-president of the World Karate Federation and the European Karate Federation.
In 1974 Czartoryski became head trustee of the Polish Dzialynska Trust, set up by his family in Norwich, England in 1899 to support Polish students in the United Kingdom and in Poland.
In 1989, after the fall of the Polish People's Republic, Czartoryski was able to visit Poland for the first time.
That year the Polish government restored ownership of the family art collection and library to Czartoryski.
In 1992 Czartoryski represented Poland at  the opening of "Circa 1492:
In 1997 Czartoryski noticed the sale at Sotheby's of a painting by the Dutch artist Jan Mostaert named Portrait of a Lady, Presumably Anne of Bretagne, which he claimed to have come from his family's looted art collection.
Czartoryski's mother, Princess María de los Dolores, died in Madrid in 1996.
In December 2016 he sold the Czartoryski collection to the Polish state at an extremely low price in a transaction that drew some criticism and resulted in legal battles.
Czartoryski collection sale

The Czartoryski collection was started in 1796 by Adam Karol Czartoryski's ancestor, Princess Izabela Czartoryska, a liberal progressive who corresponded with Voltaire, Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Benjamin Franklin.
In 1798 Prince Adam Jerzy Czartoryski, Izabela's son, visited Italy where he bought Leonardo da Vinci's Lady with an Ermine and Raphael's Portrait of a young man.
When the Germans invaded Poland that year, Augustyn Józef Czartoryski had the most valuable items hidden beneath the baroque Sieniawski family castle, while others were stored in the cellar of the museum.
After the war the Polish representative at the Allies Commission for the Retrieval of Works of Art found many of the stolen paintings and claimed them for the Czartoryski Museum.
In London in the late 1960s Adam Karol Czartoryski met Professor Marek Rostworowski , who had been appointed in 1965 as director of the Czartoryski Collection in Poland.
That year the High Court restored the Czartoryski Museum and Library and their contents to Czartoryski, who set up the Princes Czartoryski Foundation to manage the collection.
The Princes Czartoryski Museum in Kraków was closed for extensive renovations in 2010, including adding a glass and steel roof to a courtyard that was not being used.
Czartoryski decided to entrust his collection to the Polish Nation, including the Lady With An Ermine, Landscape with the Good Samaritan and works by Pierre-Auguste Renoir.
By law, the Czartoryski Collection could anyway not leave the country without authorization by the government.
The management board of the Czartoryski Foundation complained that they had not been consulted over the sale, and resigned.
The endowment was challenged by Czartoryski's daughter, Tamara, and in 2018 resulted in a lawsuit between Adam Karol and his daughter.
