Queen Anne-Marie


Queen Sofía of Spain


Marina, consort of Prince Michael


Princess Theodora of Greece and Denmark (Greek: Θεοδώρα Ντε Γκρες, romanized: Theodora de Grèce; born 9 June 1983), also known under her stage name Theodora Greece, is a British-Greek actress and member of the Greek and Danish royal families.
She is the fourth child and younger daughter of deposed King Constantine II of Greece and Queen Anne-Marie of Greece.
Theodora made her television debut in 2011 as Alison Montgomery in the American soap opera The Bold and the Beautiful.
Biography

Early life

Theodora was born on 9 June 1983 at St Mary's Hospital, London.
She is the younger daughter and fourth of the five children of the deposed Greek king Constantine II and his wife, Anne-Marie of Denmark.
Education

Theodora attended Woldingham School, an all-girls boarding school in Surrey, England, between 1994 and 2001.
After a gap year spent at St Philip's College in Alice Springs, Australia, Theodora attended Brown University where she received her Bachelor of Arts on 28 May 2006 in Theatre Arts, having also attended Northeastern University in Boston.
Career

In April 2010, Theodora moved to Los Angeles to pursue an acting career, appearing in supporting roles under the stage name Theodora Greece.
Personal life

On 16 November 2018, it was announced that Princess Theodora was engaged to American attorney Matthew Jeremiah Kumar.
On 28 September 2024, Theodora married Kumar in a Greek Orthodox ceremony officiated by Metropolitan Dorotheos II of Syros at the Metropolitan Cathedral of Athens.
Guests included 250 friends and relatives, including members of European royal families, such as the bride's aunt, Queen Sofia of Spain, and Infanta Cristina of Spain, Infanta Elena of Spain, Princess Alexandra of Sayn-Wittgenstein-Berleburg, Count Michael Ahlefeldt-Laurvig-Bille, Princess Benedikte of Denmark, Crown Prince Alexander of Yugoslavia, Crown Princess Katherine of Serbia, and Prince Christian of Hanover.
Her nieces, Princess Maria-Olympia and Arrietta Morales y de Grecia, served as bridesmaids.
For the ceremony, Theodora wore a custom gown by Celia Kritharioti, an Irish lace veil that once belonged to her great-grandmother Princess Margaret of Connaught, and a Cartier diamond tiara that was given to Princess Margaret of Connaught by Abbas II of Egypt.
The veil and tiara have been worn by all of Queen Ingrid of Denmark's female descendants.
Οn 20 December 2024, Theodora, along with the other members of the former royal family acquired Greek citizenship, under the surname Theodora de Grèce.
The family was deprived of citizenship in 1994 when the former King Constantine refused to acquire a surname, as required by law for all Greek citizens.
Filmography

Ancestry

Her paternal grandparents were King Paul of Greece and Frederica of Hanover.
Her maternal grandparents are Frederik IX of Denmark and Ingrid of Sweden.
As an agnatic descendant of Christian IX of Denmark Theodora is a Danish princess, and because King Christian's second son, Prince William of Denmark, was elected "George I, King of the Hellenes" in 1863, her father (George's great-grandson) inherited the throne of Greece in 1964.
