Infante Juan, Count of Barcelona (Juan Carlos Teresa Silverio Alfonso de Borbón y Battenberg; 20 June 1913 – 1 April 1993), was a claimant to the Spanish throne as Juan III.
He was the third son and designated heir of King Alfonso XIII and Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg.
Juan's son Juan Carlos I became King of Spain when Spain's constitutional monarchy was restored in 1975.
Early life

Infante Juan was born at the Palace of San Ildefonso.
Owing to the renunciations in 1933 of his brothers Alfonso, Prince of Asturias, and Infante Jaime, Duke of Segovia, Infante Juan became first in line to the defunct Spanish throne.
He thus received the title Prince of Asturias while serving with the Royal Navy in Bombay.
He married Princess María de las Mercedes of Bourbon-Two Sicilies (1910–2000), known in Spain as Doña María de las Mercedes de Borbón-Dos Sicilias y Orleans, in Rome on 12 October 1935.
Children

They had four children:


They lived in Cannes and Rome, and, with the outbreak of World War II, they moved to Lausanne to live with his mother, Victoria Eugenie.
Together with their children Pilar and Juan Carlos, they took part in the ship tour organized by Queen Frederica and her husband King Paul of Greece in 1954, which became known as the “Cruise of the Kings” and was attended by over 100 royals from all over Europe.
On this trip, Juan Carlos met the hosts' 15-year-old daughter, Sofia, his future wife, for the first time.
Claim to the Spanish throne

In 1931, Juan was subject to dynastic negotiations between the Alfonsists and the Carlists, concluded in the so-called Pact of Territet, which was never implemented.
Juan became heir apparent to the defunct Spanish throne after the renunciations of his two older brothers, Alfonso and Jaime, in 1933.
To assert his claim to the throne, following his father's death (in 1941) he used the title of Count of Barcelona, a sovereign title associated with the Spanish crown.
Spain runs the risk of being dragged into a new fratricidal conflict and of finding itself totally isolated from the world.
When General Franco declared Spain a monarchy in 1947, he characterized it as a "restoration".
However, Franco was afraid that Juan would roll back the Spanish State because he favoured constitutional monarchy, which would restore parliamentary democracy.
As a result, in 1969, Franco passed over Juan in favour of Juan's son, Juan Carlos, who Franco believed would be more likely to continue the dictatorship after his death.
Juan Carlos later surprised many by his support of democratising Spain.
Franco and Juan did not have a good relationship, with the latter constantly pressing Franco to restore the monarchy.
Relations soured further when Juan called Franco an "illegitimate usurper".
Juan formally renounced his rights to the Spanish throne eight years after being displaced as recognised heir to the throne by Franco, and two years after his son, Juan Carlos, had become king.
In return, his son officially granted him the title of Count of Barcelona, which he had claimed for so long.
After his death in 1993, he was buried with honours due a king, under the name Juan III (his title if he had become king) in the Royal Crypt of the monastery of San Lorenzo de El Escorial, near Madrid.
