Alexander Albert Mountbatten, 1st Marquess of Carisbrooke (born Prince Alexander Albert of Battenberg; 23 November 1886 – 23 February 1960) was a British Royal Navy officer, a member of the Hessian princely Battenberg family and the last surviving grandson of Queen Victoria.
Early life

Alexander, known as Drino, was born in 1886 at Windsor Castle in Berkshire and was educated at Wellington College and at the Britannia Royal Naval College.
His father was Prince Henry of Battenberg, the son of Prince Alexander of Hesse and by Rhine and Julie née Countess of Hauke.
His mother was Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom, the fifth daughter and the youngest child of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert.
Prince Henry of Battenberg was the product of a morganatic marriage and took his style of Prince of Battenberg from his mother, Julia von Hauke, who was created Princess of Battenberg in her own right.
At his birth, Alexander was styled His Serene Highness Prince Alexander of Battenberg because the child of a morganatic marriage is ineligible for "Grand-Ducal Highness" status.
His godparents were Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom (his maternal grandmother), Prince Alexander of Hesse and by Rhine (his paternal grandfather), the Prince of Wales (his maternal uncle), Prince Alexander of Battenberg (his paternal uncle), and Princess Irene of Hesse and by Rhine (his maternal first cousin and paternal second cousin).
Alexander was the brother-in-law to Alfonso XIII of Spain, who married Alexander's sister, Princess Victoria Eugenia, in 1906.
Military service and honours

Alexander passed a qualifying examination to become service cadet in the Royal Navy in March 1902, and subsequently joined the cadet training ship HMS Britannia at Dartmouth on 8 May 1902.
Several of his Mountbatten cousins were also subsequently members, including his first cousins once removed the Marquess of Milford Haven and Duke of Edinburgh.
He held several other foreign orders and decorations: Grand Cross and Collar of Order of Charles III (Spain), Order of Leopold, with swords (Belgium), Order of Saint Alexander Nevsky (Russia), Order of Naval Merit, fourth class (Spain), Order of the Nile (Egypt), Order of the Crown (Romania), and Croix de Guerre, with palms (France).
During World War II, despite being in his mid-fifties, the Marquess joined the Royal Air Force and was commissioned an acting pilot officer on 6 June 1941.
Marquess of Carisbrooke

Anti-German feeling during World War I led George V to change the name of the Royal House in July 1917 from the House of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha to the House of Windsor.
The Battenberg family relinquished their titles of Prince and Princess of Battenberg and the styles of Highness and Serene Highness.
Under royal warrant, they instead took the surname Mountbatten, an Anglicised form of Battenberg.
As such, Prince Alexander became Sir Alexander Mountbatten.
On 7 November 1917, he was created Marquess of Carisbrooke, Earl of Berkhamsted and Viscount Launceston.
In the 1930s, author E. F. Benson dedicated two of his famous novels, Mapp and Lucia and Lucia's Progress, to the Marquess of Carisbrooke.
Marriage

On 19 July 1917, he married Lady Irene Denison (4 July 1890 – 16 July 1956), the only daughter of the 2nd Earl of Londesborough and his wife, Lady Grace Adelaide Fane, at the Chapel Royal of St James's Palace.
Lord and Lady Carisbrooke had one child, a daughter:
Carisbrooke was likely homosexual or bisexual; according to the published diaries of Cecil Beaton, in his later years, Lord Carisbrooke had a longtime male lover, Simon Fleet.
More is written about Lord Carisbrooke and his wife in the published diaries of James Lees-Milne and Henry "Chips" Channon.


Residences

By 1926 Lord and Lady Carisbrooke had established a London residence at No. 4 Belgrave Place, Belgravia, which continued to be their London home until early 1931.
By 1938 Lord and Lady Carisbrooke lived at Kensington Palace.
Following the death of Lady Carisbrooke in 1956, Lord Carisbrooke was granted the use of a grace-and-favour residence, Apartment 10, Kensington Palace, which remained as his home until his death in 1960.
Later career

Lord Carisbrooke, who received no state allowance, became the first member of the British royal family to work in the commercial sector.
Death

Lord Carisbrooke died on 23 February 1960, aged 73, at Kensington Palace.
His ashes were interred within the Battenberg Chapel at St. Mildred's Church, Whippingham, on the Isle of Wight.
As he had no sons, the title Marquess of Carisbrooke became extinct upon his death.
