Prince Amedeo, 3rd Duke of Aosta (Amedeo Umberto Isabella Luigi Filippo Maria Giuseppe Giovanni di Savoia-Aosta; 21 October 1898 – 3 March 1942) was the third Duke of Aosta and a first cousin once removed of the King of Italy, Victor Emmanuel III.
Biography

Amedeo was born in Turin, Piedmont, to Prince Emanuele Filiberto, 2nd Duke of Aosta (son of Amadeo I of Spain and Princess Maria Vittoria), and Princess Hélène (daughter of Prince Philippe of Orléans and Princess Marie Isabelle of Orléans).
As his patrilinal great-grandfather was King Victor Emmanuel II of Italy, he was a member of the House of Savoy.
He was known from birth by the courtesy title of Duke of Apulia.
Amedeo was a very tall man (in stark contrast to the King, who was known to be quite short).
According to Amedeo Guillet, he was once referred to by a journalist as "Your Highness" (which in Italian could also be interpreted to mean "your height").
The Duke replied in jest: "198 centimetres ".
Education and early military career

Amedeo was educated at St David's College, Reigate, Surrey, in England.
Amedeo entered the Nunziatella, the military academy in Naples, joined the Italian Royal Army (Regio Esercito) and fought with distinction in the artillery during World War I.
Amedeo subsequently rejoined the Italian armed forces and became a pilot.
Amedeo served under Marshal Rodolfo Graziani and Libyan Governor Pietro Badoglio during the later stages of the so-called "pacification of Libya" (1911 to 1932).
Amedeo and his fellow airmen harried the Senussi forces of Omar Mukhtar from the sky.
When hostilities in Libya came to an end in early 1932, much was made of the participation of the "Duke of Apulia" as the commander of the airmen who forced the Senussi to flee Libya and seek relief in Egypt.
Amedeo, portrayed by the tall actor Sky du Mont, appears in several non-flying scenes with Graziani in the movie The Lion of the Desert, about the Italian conquest of Libya.
On 4 July 1931, upon the death of his father, Amedeo became the Duke of Aosta.
Viceroy and governor-general

In 1937, after the Italian conquest of Ethiopia during the Second Italo-Abyssinian War, the Duke of Aosta replaced Marshal Graziani as Viceroy and as Governor-General of Italian East Africa.
Amedeo was succeeded by his brother, Aimone, 4th Duke of Aosta.
Aftermath

Amedeo was well known and highly regarded for being a gentleman.
Count Galeazzo Ciano, Italian Foreign Minister under his father-in-law, Italian dictator Benito Mussolini, paid Amedeo a high compliment in his famous diaries.
Upon being given the news of the Duke's death, Ciano wrote, "So dies the image of a Prince and an Italian.
"


Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia was also impressed by the respect and care that the Duke of Aosta showed to the exiled Emperor's personal property left behind in Addis Ababa.
In a gesture of thanks, the Emperor during his state visit to Italy in 1953 invited the widowed Duchess of Aosta to tea during his stay in Milan, but was then informed by the Italian government that receiving the Duchess would cause offence to the Italian Republic, and so the Emperor cancelled the visit.
Instead he invited the 5th Duke of Aosta to Ethiopia in the mid-1960s, and accorded him all the protocol due to visiting royalty.
Family

Amedeo was married on 5 November 1927, in Naples, to his first cousin Princess Anne of Orléans (1906–1986), daughter of Prince Jean, Duke of Guise, and Princess Isabelle of Orléans.
They had two daughters:


Cultural depictions

Prince Amedeo's time in Italian Cyrenaica was depicted in the 1981 film Lion of the Desert; Amedeo was played by Sky du Mont.


Amedeo was also briefly mentioned in A Farewell to Arms by Ernest Hemingway.
In the popular mod for the grand strategy game Hearts of Iron IV, Kaiserreich, Amedeo is depicted as King Amadeo I di Savoia-Aosta of Sardinia, an exiled monarchist government of Italy seeking to reclaim the land from the northern Socialist Republic of Italy and southern Kingdom of the Two Sicilies.
