Princess Christina of the Netherlands (Maria Christina; 18 February 1947 – 16 August 2019) was the youngest of four daughters of Queen Juliana of the Netherlands and Prince Bernhard of Lippe-Biesterfeld.
She taught singing in New York and was a long-term supporter of the Youth Music Foundation in the Netherlands.
Christina died of bone cancer in 2019.
Early life

Princess Christina, who was known as Princess Marijke in her youth, was born on 18 February 1947, at Soestdijk Palace, Baarn, the Netherlands.
Her parents were Crown Princess Juliana, the only child of Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands, and Prince Bernhard of Lippe-Biesterfeld.
At the time of her birth, she was fifth in the line to the throne after her mother and three older sisters: Princess Beatrix, Princess Irene and Princess Margriet.
She was baptised on 9 October 1947 and her godparents included Queen Wilhelmina (her maternal grandmother), her eldest sister Princess Beatrix, Sir Winston Churchill (for whom her father stood proxy), her paternal grandmother Princess Armgard of Lippe-Biesterfeld, Prince Felix of Luxembourg, and his niece Princess Anne of Bourbon-Parma.
On 4 September 1948, after a reign of nearly 58 years, Christina's grandmother Queen Wilhelmina (68) abdicated the throne and her mother was inaugurated as Queen of the Kingdom of the Netherlands on 6 September 1948.
Childhood and education

While her mother was pregnant with Christina, she contracted either measles or rubella and as a result, Christina was born nearly blind.
In 1963, she stopped using her first name Maria, from then on referring to herself merely as Christina.
Marriage

While living in New York as Christina van Oranje, the Princess started a relationship with Cuban exile Jorge Guillermo.
Although societal attitudes were changing, because Guillermo was a Catholic, it was still possible that a marriage could cause a public scandal in the Netherlands such as the one that occurred in 1964 when Christina's sister Princess Irene married the Catholic Prince Carlos Hugo of Bourbon-Parma.
Accordingly, Princess Christina, at that time ninth in line for the Dutch throne, renounced her and her descendants' rights to the throne before officially announcing her engagement on St. Valentine's Day, 1975.
After their wedding, they lived in New York but later moved to the Netherlands, where they built Villa Eikenhorst  in Wassenaar, near The Hague.
She recorded and released several CDs (classical, Broadway) in 2000 and 2002, and was a long-term supporter of the Youth Music Foundation in the Netherlands.
In 1989, she allowed her name to be used for the Prinses Christina Concours, an annual competition held in the Netherlands to encourage the musical talents of children in the Netherlands.
One of her few public performances was at the marriage of her nephew Prince Bernhard Jr.
She also sang at the funerals of both of her parents Princess Juliana and Prince Bernhard in the New Church (Delft).
Early 2019, Christina made headlines when she decided to sell several works of art.
These works came to her through inheritance from the Dutch royal family: art lover William II of the Netherlands.
Death

In June 2018, it was announced that Princess Christina had been diagnosed with bone cancer.
Titles, styles and honours

Honours

National honours

Foreign honours

Ancestry

References

External links

2 also Princess of Lippe-Biesterfeld
