Don Carlos, Prince of Bourbon-Two Sicilies, Infante of Spain (Full Italian name: Carlo Maria Francesco d'Assisi Pasquale Ferdinando Antonio di Padova Francesco de Paola Alfonso Andrea Avelino Tancredi, Principe di Borbone delle Due Sicilie, Infante di Spagna; 10 November 1870 – 11 November 1949) was the son of Prince Alfonso of the Two Sicilies, Count of Caserta and Princess Maria Antonietta of Bourbon-Two Sicilies, and nephew of the last King of the Two Sicilies, Francis II.


Marriages and children

On 14 February 1901 in Madrid, Carlos married Mercedes, Princess of Asturias, elder daughter of the late King Alfonso XII of Spain and of his wife Archduchess Maria Christina of Austria.
Mercedes was the elder sister and heir presumptive to King Alfonso XIII of Spain, an unmarried teenager.
In 1907, Carlos married secondly to Princess Louise of Orléans, daughter of Prince Philippe, Count of Paris.
The couple had four children:


Prince Carlos's descendants include King Felipe VI of Spain, Prince Pedro, Duke of Calabria, Prince Pedro Carlos of Orléans-Braganza, and Philip, Hereditary Prince of Yugoslavia, among others.
Military service

Carlos served in the Spanish Army in the Spanish–American War and received the Military Order of Maria Cristina.
Two Sicilies succession

In 1894, Carlos's father Alfonso became the head of the House of Bourbon-Two Sicilies.
On marrying his first wife, Carlos renounced on 14 December 1900 his future rights of succession to the non-existent Crown of Two Sicilies in an official document, known as the Act of Cannes, subject to a requirement in the Treaty of Naples of 1759 and the Pragmatic Decree of 6 October 1759 that the Crown of Spain should not be combined with the "Italian Sovereignty".
In 1960, Carlos' elder brother Ferdinand died without male issue, and a dispute arose between Carlos' son Alfonso and Carlos' younger brother Ranieri on the headship of the house, this with competing claims: by the law of primogeniture, Carlos' son Alfonso was considered the heir, but Ranieri claimed that Carlos had renounced his rights and those of his descendants according to the Act of Cannes.
Alfonso refuted that claim by stating that it was only a promise from his father to relinquish this right if the crown of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies were to be united with the Spanish Crown.
Since this did not happen, the act had no effect and Carlos' son Alfonso reclaimed his rights.
Alfonso's claim was recognised by the heads of the different lines of the House of Bourbon, although not by the head of the Orleans family, and in 1983 the Spanish Council of State, following an investigation by the Ministries of Justice and Foreign Affairs, the Royal Academy of Jurisprudence and Legislation and the Institute Salazar y Castro concluded unanimously in favour of Infante Don Alfonso's only son, Prince and Infante Don Carlos, a position shared by the Spanish Royal House.
