James Alexander Philip Theo Mountbatten-Windsor, Earl of Wessex (born 17 December 2007), styled Viscount Severn until 2023, is a member of the British royal family.
He is the younger child and only son of Prince Edward, Duke of Edinburgh, and Sophie, Duchess of Edinburgh.
James is the youngest grandchild of Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, and a nephew of King Charles III.
Infancy

James Alexander Philip Theo Mountbatten-Windsor was born at 4:20 pm on 17 December 2007 at Frimley Park Hospital, Surrey by caesarean section.
His father Prince Edward, Duke of Edinburgh, is the youngest child of Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh.
His mother Sophie, Duchess of Edinburgh, worked in public relations before becoming a full-time member of the royal family after her marriage in 1999.
His full name, James Alexander Philip Theo, was announced on 21 December.
James was baptised on 19 April 2008 in the private chapel at Windsor Castle by David Conner, Dean of Windsor, witnessed by his godparents, Alastair Bruce, Duncan Bullivant, Thomas Hill, Denise Poulton, Jeanye Irwin, and his paternal grandparents, Elizabeth II and Prince Philip.
Education

James attended Eagle House School, a coeducational preparatory school near Sandhurst, Berkshire, from 2011 to 2021, before enrolling at the private Radley College in Oxfordshire.
Official appearances

James made his first official appearance in the carriage procession at Trooping the Colour in 2016, and also took part in the 2022 Trooping the Colour.
Following the thanksgiving memorial service for his grandfather Prince Philip on 29 March 2022, James attended the Platinum Jubilee National Service of Thanksgiving and the Platinum Party at the Palace in June 2022.
On 17 September 2022, during the period of official mourning for his grandmother Queen Elizabeth II, James joined his sister Louise and six cousins in mounting a 15-minute vigil around the Queen's coffin as it lay in state at Westminster Hall.
On 6 May 2023, James, who then held the courtesy title Earl of Wessex, attended his uncle Charles III's coronation at Westminster Abbey, together with the rest of the royal family.
The following day, he attended the Coronation Concert at Windsor Castle.
On 31 March 2024, James attended the Easter Matins Service at St. George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, with his mother and father.
James was accorded this courtesy title at birth as heir apparent to his father's earldom.
At birth, James automatically became a prince of the United Kingdom (Prince James of Wessex, now Prince James of Edinburgh) under the terms of the 1917 letters patent, which assigned princely status and the style of Royal Highness to all male-line grandchildren of a sovereign.
However, when his parents married, Buckingham Palace announced that their children would be styled as the children of an earl rather than as prince or princess.
In 2020, James's mother reaffirmed that James and his sister retained the right to their royal titles and styles, and could choose whether to use them from the age of 18.
When his father was created Duke of Edinburgh in March 2023, James became styled by courtesy as Earl of Wessex, the family's senior subsidiary title.
The Dukedom of Edinburgh, having been created as a life peerage, will become extinct upon his father's death, but James remains heir apparent to his father's hereditary peerages of Earl of Wessex, Earl of Forfar, and Viscount Severn.
Honours and decorations

In June 2008, to recognise Prince Edward's visit to the Canadian province of Manitoba, a lake in the north of the province was named Lake James.
James's sister was similarly honoured by Lake Louise in the same province.
