Prince Lennart Bernadotte, Count of Wisborg (born Prince Lennart of Sweden, Duke of Småland; 8 May 1909 – 21 December 2004) was a Swedish-German landscaper, filmmaker, photographer and was a grandson of King Gustaf V of Sweden.
He was also the eldest great-grandchild of King George I of Greece.
He was born at the Royal Palace in Stockholm, to Prince Wilhelm, Duke of Södermanland, and Grand Duchess Maria Pavlovna of Russia.
At birth Bernadotte was a Swedish prince and was titled Duke of Småland.
Thus, he was called Mr. Bernadotte as a result.
Title

Under the Swedish Act of Succession, a prince or princess marrying without the consent of the monarch and government forfeits the right of succession for themselves and their descendants.
In a new policy adopted in the case of Lennart Bernadotte, they were also forbidden to use their titles and told to use the surname of Bernadotte.
By his marriage on 11 March 1932 Prince Lennart consequently, as far as Swedish records were concerned, was to be called Mr. Lennart Bernadotte.
On 2 July 1951, for himself, his wife and his marital descendants, Bernadotte was admitted by Grand Duchess Charlotte (head of state at the time) into the nobility of Luxembourg as Count of Wisborg and in that conferral was also called Gustaf Lennart Nicolas Paul Prince Bernadotte.
It has been reported (without accuracy) that Lennart and his cousin Sigvard Bernadotte wanted King Carl XVI Gustaf of Sweden to restore their royal titles, which he could have done, but that he chose not to do so; no such request was actually ever made however.
Career

In 1944 Bernadotte portrayed the young Crown Prince Carl of Sweden and Norway in the historical film Prince Gustaf, Bernadotte's only screen acting role.
He served as head of the Sveriges Scoutförbund (Scouting Association of Sweden) from 1948 to 1951


Lennart Bernadotte concentrated his energy on his estate on the island of Mainau in Lake Constance, Germany, where he died, and on his charitable fund, the Lennart Bernadotte Stiftung.
Family

In London on 11 March 1932, Bernadotte married firstly Karin Emma Louise Nissvandt (7 July 1911 – 9 September 1991).
In Mainau on 29 April 1972, Bernadotte married Sonja Anita Maria Haunz (7 May 1944 – 21 October 2008).
Bernadotte died on 21 December 2004.
