Georg Friedrich Prinz von Preussen (born 10 June 1976, as Georg Friedrich Ferdinand Prinz von Preußen) is a German heir who is the current head of the Prussian branch of the House of Hohenzollern, a dynasty that ruled over the German Empire and the Kingdom of Prussia until near the end of World War I.
He is the great-great-grandson of Wilhelm II, the last German Emperor and last King of Prussia, who abdicated and went into exile upon Germany's defeat in World War I in 1918.
Education and career

Georg Friedrich is the only son and eldest child of Louis Ferdinand Prinz von Preussen (1944–1977) and Countess Donata of Castell-Rüdenhausen (1950–2015).
Born into a mediatised princely family, his mother later became Duchess Donata of Oldenburg when she married secondly Duke Friedrich August of Oldenburg, who had previously been married to her sister-in-law Princess Marie Cécile of Prussia.
Georg Friedrich earned his degree in business economics at the Freiberg University of Mining and Technology.
Georg Friedrich works for a company specialising in helping universities to bring their innovations to market.
He also administered the Princess Kira of Prussia Foundation, founded by his grandmother Grand Duchess Kira of Russia in 1952, now administered by his wife.
Until 30 December 2025, Georg Friedrich owned a two-thirds share of his family's original seat, Hohenzollern Castle, with the head of the Swabian branch, Karl Friedrich, Prince of Hohenzollern, owning the remaining third.
In an agreement taking effect on 31 December 2025, Karl Friedrich transferred his share to Georg Friedrich, giving the latter full responsibility for the operation, maintenance and cultural development of the castle.
Georg Friedrich continues to claim compensation for land and palaces in Berlin expropriated from his family, a claim begun in March 1991 by his grandfather Prince Louis Ferdinand of Prussia under the Compensation Act (EALG).
House of Hohenzollern

Georg Friedrich succeeded his grandfather, Louis Ferdinand, as Head of the Royal House of Prussia, a branch of the House of Hohenzollern, on 26 September 1994.
His position as sole heir to the estate of his grandfather was challenged by his uncles, Friedrich Wilhelm and Michael, who filed a lawsuit claiming that, despite their renunciations as dynasts at the time of their marriages, the loss of their inheritance rights based on their selection of spouse was discriminatory and unconstitutional.
However, the Federal Court of Justice of Germany overturned the original rulings in favour of Georg Friedrich's uncles, the case being remanded to the courts at Hechingen and Stuttgart.
This time both courts ruled in favour of Georg Friedrich.
His uncles then took their case to the Federal Constitutional Court of Germany which overruled the previous court rulings in Georg Friedrich's favour, on 22 March 2004.
On 19 October 2005, a German regional court ruled that Georg Friedrich was indeed the principal heir of his grandfather, Louis Ferdinand (who was the primary beneficiary of the trust set up for the estate of Wilhelm II), but also concluded that each of the children of Louis Ferdinand was entitled to a portion of the Prussian inheritance.
Family

In 2011, Georg Friedrich married Princess Sophie of Isenburg.
On 20 January 2013, Georg Friedrich's wife, Sophie, gave birth to twin sons in Bremen, Carl Friedrich Franz Alexander and Louis Ferdinand Christian Albrecht.
Carl Friedrich, the elder of the two, is his father's heir apparent.
On 17 November 2016, Sophie gave birth to Heinrich Albert Johann Georg, their fourth child.
Property claims

In 2014, Georg Friedrich filed a claim on the property of the Huis Doorn, where Kaiser Wilhelm II spent his last years after abdication, but this was rejected by Minister of Education, Culture and Science Jet Bussemaker.
In mid-2019 it was revealed that, since 2014, Georg Friedrich had filed claims for permanent right of residency for his family in Cecilienhof, or one of two other former Hohenzollern palaces in Potsdam, as well as return of the family library, 266 paintings, an imperial crown and sceptre, and the letters of Empress Augusta Victoria.
This sparked a public debate about the legitimacy of these claims and the role of the Hohenzollern during and before the Nazi regime in Germany, specifically Crown Prince Wilhelm's involvement.
On 9 March 2023, Georg Friedrich dropped the suit, hoping that doing so would "open the way for an unencumbered historical debate on the role of my family in the 20th Century following the end of the monarchy.
"


In June 2019, a claim made by Georg Friedrich that Rheinfels Castle be returned to the Hohenzollern family was dismissed by a court.
}} Media related to Georg Friedrich, Prince of Prussia at Wikimedia Commons
