Count Christian of Rosenborg  (Christian Frederik Franz Knud Harald Carl Oluf Gustav Georg Erik; 22 October 1942 – 21 May 2013) was a member of the Danish royal family.
Born Prince Christian of Denmark, from 1947 he was third in the line of line of succession until the constitution was changed in 1953 to allow females to inherit the crown, placing his branch of the dynasty behind that of his cousin Margrethe and her two younger sisters.
Family

He was born at Sorgenfri Palace, Sorgenfri, as the younger son of Hereditary Prince Knud by his wife and first cousin, Princess Caroline-Mathilde of Denmark.
Loss of place in succession

From the death of his grandfather in 1947, Christian stood only behind his father and elder brother Prince Ingolf in the order of hereditary succession to the throne, with only future children of Ingolf possibly taking a place ahead of him.
His father Prince Knud was then the heir presumptive, due to succeed Christian's uncle King Frederik IX, who had three daughters but no sons.
In 1953, the Constitution of Denmark was amended to allow cognatic primogeniture.
The new law made thirteen-year-old Princess Margrethe the new heir presumptive, placing her and her two sisters before Prince Knud and his family in the succession.
Christian was thus relegated to sixth in the line of succession to the Danish throne, but more importantly, he then ranked behind Margrethe and others who were likely to have dynastic children of their own (as has, in fact, happened).
The princess became Queen Margrethe II in 1972 and reigned until her abdication in 2024.
Christian's place in the line of succession, if he had been still eligible, would have been no higher than thirteenth in 2013.
Marriage, loss of dynastic rights and children

By 1971, Princess Margrethe had produced two children, pushing Christian to 8th in the line of succession.
The king's permission to marry was not sought because it was expected to be denied, since Christian's fiancée was an untitled commoner.
Prior to his elder son's wedding in 1968, Prince Knud sought to convince his brother that Ingolf should be allowed to retain his royal title after his non-dynastic marriage, a privilege which might have been subsequently extended to Christian.
But the king refused, on the grounds that other males of the dynasty, who had been demoted to counts of Rosenborg upon marriage, might try to re-claim their royal rank if Ingolf were allowed to do so despite his marrying a commoner as they had done.
So, in 1971, Christian renounced his rights to the throne and took the title count of Rosenborg.
On 27 February 1971, at Kongens Lyngby Kirke, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark, Christian married Anne Dorte Maltoft-Nielsen (3 October 1947 in Frederikssund – 2 January 2014 in Copenhagen) who thus became Her Excellency Countess Anne Dorte of Rosenborg.
Although lacking the prior royal assent of the monarch given in the Council of State that the law required, the king expressed no personal opposition to his nephew's choice of bride and, according to Christian, the king's private consent later had to be formally registered by the King-in-Council.
In a 1985 interview with Billed-Bladet, Count Christian had explained (translated from Danish):
As protocol dictates, I had to ask my uncle, King Frederik IX, if he had any objections to my getting engaged...
I was number four in the line of succession after Princess Margrethe, Princess Benedikte, and my father.
Count Christian and Countess Anne Dorte had three daughters: 


All three were born “Komtesser” a lower title than “Grevinde” which translates to “Countess” from birth.
And a title that all daughters of Counts in Denmark are given.
Public life

Count Christian took part in some major public events associated with the royal family, in 2004, he and Countess Anne Dorte attended the wedding on 14 May 2004 of Crown Prince Frederik at Copenhagen Cathedral, Copenhagen and the subsequent reception at Fredensborg Palace.
They were included in the official guest-list as members of the Danish Royal Family when they attended the luncheon to celebrate the 75th birthday of Prince Henrik at Fredensborg Palace on 11 June 2009; and the ruby jubilee celebrations for Queen Margrethe.
Death

Count Christian died on 21 May 2013 (aged 70) at Gentofte Hospital, Copenhagen in Denmark.
A number of members of the Danish royal family, led by Queen Margrethe, attended Count Christian's funeral, held at Lyngby Church on 29 May 2013.
His wife Countess Anne Dorte of Rosenborg died just 7 months later on 2 January 2014 in Copenhagen.
