Descendants of Prince Felix and also members of the Grand Ducal Family of Luxembourg:


Princess Joan


Descendants of Prince René:


Princess Maria Pia


Princess Marina


Descendants of Prince Louis:


Prince RémyPrincess Elisabeth


Princess Chantal
Prince JeanPrincess Virginia


Princess Beatrix*


Princess Margriet*Pieter van Vollenhoven*


Prince Jaime Bernardo of Bourbon-Parma, Count of Bardi (born 13 October 1972) is a Dutch diplomat and the second son and third child of Princess Irene of the Netherlands and Carlos Hugo, Duke of Parma.
He is a member of the House of Bourbon-Parma as well a member of the extended Dutch royal family.
He was the senior advisor on private sector partnerships at the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees until 2021 and served as the climate envoy of the Netherlands.
Early life

Jaime was born in Nijmegen, Netherlands.
He has a twin sister, Princess Margarita, who was born one minute earlier.
Besides his twin sister, the prince has one elder brother, Carlos, Duke of Parma, and one younger sister, Princess Carolina.
Prince Jaime was born six weeks prematurely and stayed with his sister in an incubator at the hospital.
Jaime was baptised by Bernardus Johannes Cardinal Alfrink, with his grandfather Prince Bernhard of Lippe-Biesterfeld and his grandmother Princess Madeleine of Bourbon-Parma as his godparents.
Together with his mother and his siblings he moved to the Soestdijk Palace (Baarn), then residence of his grandparents, Queen Juliana and Prince Bernhard, where he lived for several years.
He now works for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands.
His first role was as the first secretary of the Netherlands Embassy in Baghdad, before becoming a political advisor to the peace mission in Pol-e Khomri in the Baghlan Province in the northern part of Afghanistan.
Until the summer of 2007 the prince worked on secondment in the cabinet of the European Commissioner Neelie Kroes.
On 7 February 2014, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs announced that he would be appointed as ambassador of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to the Holy See.
Prince Jaime was, on 15 July 2014, sworn in as ambassador by King Willem-Alexander and he served till August 2018.
In August 2021 he started as the Climate Envoy of the Netherlands and served for over four years.
The prince performs representative tasks for the Ducal House of Bourbon-Parma.
On 9 November 2015, it was announced that the couple were expecting a second child; daughter Gloria Irene was born on (2016-05-09)9 May 2016.
In a 2015 interview, Princess Viktória stated that the gender of her future child did not matter ("fortunately, we can not influence nature in the terms of gender"), after being told that there were no grandsons for the late Duke of Parma (in April 2016, Jaime's elder brother Carlos, Duke of Parma finally had a son, named Carlos Enrique).
Titles, styles and honours

Titles

Honours

Dynastic honours

Foreign honours

Notes

Already a ducal prince from birth, his father bestowed the substantive title Conte di Bardi ('Count of Bardi') upon him on 2 September 1996.
In 1996 he was incorporated into the Dutch nobility by Queen Beatrix, with the highest noble title Prins de Bourbon de Parme (Prince of Bourbon-Parma), and styled Zijne Koninklijke Hoogheid ('His Royal Highness').
He does not belong to the House of Orange-Nassau or the limited Dutch royal house, but as a grandson of Queen Juliana and cousin of the present King Willem-Alexander, he is an official member of the more extended Dutch royal family.
References

External links

2 gave up the title "Prince of the Netherlands, but still held the title "Prince of Orange-Nassau"
3 title granted by Royal Decree to descendants of Princess Irene
