Ernst August von Hannover (German: Ernst August Albert Paul Otto Rupprecht Oskar Berthold Friedrich-Ferdinand Christian-Ludwig Prinz von Hannover Herzog zu Braunschweig und Lüneburg Königlicher Prinz von Großbritannien und Irland, lit.
'Ernest Augustus Albert Paul Otto Rupert Oscar Berthold Frederick-Ferdinand Christian-Louis, Prince of Hanover, Duke of Brunswick and Lüneburg, Royal Prince of Great Britain and Ireland'; born 26 February 1954) is the head of the House of Hanover, members of which reigned in Great Britain and Ireland from 1714 to 1901, the Kingdom of Hanover from 1814 to 1866 (electorate, from 1714 to 1814), and the Duchy of Brunswick from 1913 to 1918.
As the husband of Princess Caroline of Monaco, he is the brother-in-law of Albert II, Prince of Monaco.
Background and education

Ernst August was born in Hanover, the eldest son of Prince Ernest Augustus of Hanover (1914–1987), the former Hereditary Prince of Brunswick and his first wife, Princess Ortrud of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg (1925–1980).
He was christened Ernst August Albert Paul Otto Rupprecht Oskar Berthold Friedrich-Ferdinand Christian-Ludwig.
As the senior male-line descendant of George III of the United Kingdom, Ernst August is head of the House of Hanover.
He is a first cousin of Queen Sofía of Spain and King Constantine II of Greece.
Ancestry and heritage

The title of Prince of Great Britain and Ireland was recognised ad personam for Ernst August's father and his father's siblings by George V of the United Kingdom on 17 June 1914.
However, the title Royal Prince of Great Britain and Ireland had been entered into the family's German passports, together with the German titles, in 1914.
Ernst August continues to claim the style, "Royal Prince of Great Britain and Ireland".
However, in addition to being a German, Ernst August also has British citizenship since his father had successfully claimed it under the Sophia Naturalization Act 1705 (in the case of Attorney-General v. Prince Ernest Augustus of Hanover).
Since foreign royal titles can't be entered into a British passport, his father ended up being named Ernest Augustus Guelph, with the addition of His Royal Highness.
His children, including Ernst August, inherited British nationality under this name.
Marriage and family

First marriage

By a 24 August 1981 declaration issued by his father as the Head of House, pursuant to Chapter 3, §§ 3 and 5 of the House laws of 1836, Ernst August was authorised to marry dynastically, and did firstly marry, civilly in Pattensen on 28 August 1981 and religiously on 30 August 1981, Chantal Hochuli (born 2 June 1955 in Zürich), the daughter and heiress of a Swiss German architect and real estate developer, Johann Gustav "Hans" Hochuli (14 March 1912 in Switzerland – ?), and his German wife Rosmarie Lembeck (8 April 1921, in Essen, Rhine, Prussia, Germany – 12 December 2011).
They have two sons, Prince Ernst August (born 19 July 1983) and Prince Christian (born 1 June 1985).
Ernst August and Chantal Hochuli divorced in London on 23 October 1997.
In 1988, Ernst August unsuccessfully claimed custody of his infant nephew Otto Heinrich, son of his younger brother, Prince Ludwig Rudolph of Hanover.
Ludwig Rudolph placed a call to his brother in London, imploring him to take care of the couple's 10-month-old son, and shortly afterwards died by suicide.
Custody of Otto Heinrich was eventually awarded, contrary to the expressed wishes of Ludwig Rudolph as the surviving parent and Ernst August's legal efforts, to the child's maternal grandparents, Count Ariprand (1925–1996) and Countess Maria von Thurn und Valsassina-Como-Vercelli (born 1929), to be raised at their family seat, Bleiburg Castle in southern Austria.
Second marriage

Ernst August married secondly, civilly in Monaco on 23 January 1999, Princess Caroline of Monaco, who was at the time expecting their daughter, Princess Alexandra (born 20 July 1999).
As he was descended from George II of Great Britain in the male line, Ernst August sought and received permission to marry pursuant to the British Royal Marriages Act 1772, which would not be repealed until the Succession to the Crown Act 2013 took effect on 26 March 2015.
Similarly the Monégasque court officially notified the government of France of Caroline's marriage to Ernst August, receiving assurance that there was no objection in compliance with the (since defunct)
Moreover, in order for Caroline to retain her claim to the throne of Monaco and to transmit succession rights to future offspring, the couple were also obliged to obtain the approval of yet a third nation, in the form of official consent to the marriage of Caroline's father, Prince Rainier III, as the sovereign of Monaco.
After their marriage, Ernst August and Caroline moved to Le Mée-sur-Seine, France, where they had purchased an 18th-century manor house from their friend Karl Lagerfeld.
In 2009, it was reported that Caroline had separated from Ernst August and returned to live in Monaco.
Controversies

Assault on journalist

In 1999, Ernst August was accused of assaulting a journalist with an umbrella.
Turkish Pavilion

Ernst August was photographed urinating on the Turkish Pavilion at the Expo 2000 event in Hanover, causing a diplomatic incident and a complaint from the Turkish embassy accusing him of insulting the Turkish people.
Assault charge

In 2000, Ernst August was involved in a dispute with a German man, Joseph Brunnlehner, on the island of Lamu in Kenya.
Brunnlehner was the operator of a disco, and Ernst August allegedly assaulted him with a knuckleduster, upset about the noise coming from the disco.
Family property dispute

In 2004, Ernst August had signed over his German property to his elder son, including Marienburg Castle, the agricultural estate of Calenberg Castle, the "Princely House" at Herrenhausen Gardens in Hanover and some forests near Blankenburg Castle (Harz) which he had repurchased in former East Germany after the German reunification of 1990.
At the time, Ernst August's wealth was estimated as high as $250 million.
Since then, the younger Ernst August has taken over many representative tasks on behalf of his father.
In 2013, however, Ernst August was removed from the chairmanship of a family foundation based in Liechtenstein, the Duke of Cumberland Foundation, which holds the properties near Gmunden in Austria, the Hanovers' main residence in exile after 1866 when their Kingdom of Hanover was annexed by Prussia.
Instead, the younger Ernst August was put in charge, reportedly for negligence on part of his father, at the initiative of the foundation's trustee Prince Michael of Liechtenstein.
The foundation manages vast forests, a game park, a hunting lodge, the Queen's Villa and other property.
In 2017, Ernst August filed legal action to recover his chairmanship, and he intends to revoke the bestowal of his German property.
Assault on police

In 2020, under the influence of alcohol and medication, Ernst August injured a police officer at his hunting lodge in Austria.
Health

On Sunday, 3 April 2005, Ernst August was admitted to hospital with acute pancreatitis.
The next day, he fell into a deep coma, two days before the death of his father-in-law, Rainier III, Prince of Monaco.
