Prince August Wilhelm Heinrich Günther Viktor of Prussia (29 January 1887 – 25 March 1949), nicknamed "Auwi", was the fourth son of German Emperor Wilhelm II by his first wife, Augusta Victoria of Schleswig-Holstein.
Early life

He was born in the Potsdamer Stadtschloss when his grandfather was still the Crown Prince of Prussia.
He spent his youth with his siblings at the New Palace, also in Potsdam, and his school days with his brothers at the Prinzenhaus in Plön in his mother's ancestral Schleswig-Holstein.
Prince August Wilhelm married his cousin Princess Alexandra Victoria of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg on 22 October 1908 at the Berliner Stadtschloss.
The couple had planned to take up residence in Schönhausen Palace in Berlin, but changed their mind when his father, Kaiser Wilhelm, decided to leave his son the Villa Liegnitz in the Sanssouci Park.
In 1912 their only child, Prince Alexander Ferdinand of Prussia, was born.
In the First World War, August Wilhelm was made district administrator (Landrat) of the district of Ruppin; his office and residence was now Schloss Rheinsberg.
His personal adjutant Hans Georg von Mackensen played an important role in his life; the two had been close friends since August Wilhelm's youth.
These "pronounced homophilic tendencies" contributed to the failure of his marriage to Princess Alexandra Victoria.
The couple did not divorce while August Wilhelm's father, Kaiser Wilhelm II, was Emperor, owing to his opposition to the idea.
Weimar Republic

Initially, many Allied and German leaders favored transitioning Germany to a constitutional monarchy with August Wilhelm as either Emperor or regent for one of Crown Prince Wilhelm's children, although this possibility was quickly precluded when Philipp Scheidemann was forced by the pressures of the German Revolution to declare a republic.
August Wilhelm was awarded custody of their son.
After his divorce and the marriage of his friend von Mackensen to Winifred von Neurath, the daughter of Konstantin von Neurath, August Wilhelm lived a reclusive life in his villa in Potsdam.
Involvement with Nazism

August Wilhelm joined the conservative nationalist veterans group Der Stahlhelm (English: "The Steel helmet").
His involvement with the NSDAP and his adoration of Adolf Hitler made August Wilhelm often the subject of mockery by the left-wing press (who gave him the nickname Braunhemdchen Auwi, or "Auwi the Little Brown Shirt"), politicians (French Ambassador André François-Poncet called him Hanswurst "Hans the Brown Sausage") and from the National Socialists themselves (Joseph Goebbels referred to him as a "good-natured but slightly gormless boy").
As a representative of the erstwhile Hohenzollern dynasty, August Wilhelm was deliberately used by the party to gain votes in elections: he was elected as its lead candidate for the Landtag of Prussia in April 1932, and retained his seat until the Landtag's dissolution in October 1933.
Through his appearances at the party's mass rallies, he addressed himself to sections of the population that were lukewarm towards National Socialism and convinced them "that Hitler was not a threat, but a benefactor of the German people and the German Empire".
At the 5 March 1933 election, August Wilhelm was elected as a Nazi deputy to the German Reichstag from electoral constituency 4, Potsdam I, and he would retain this seat until the fall of the Nazi regime.
August Wilhelm held these positions until the fall of the Nazi regime.
However, after the passing of the Enabling Act of 1933 and the establishment of the dictatorship of the Third Reich, the party no longer needed the former prince, who had secretly hoped "that Hitler would one day hoist him or his son Alexander up to the vacant throne of the Kaiser".
One high-profile visit took August Wilhelm to the Passau Hall of the Nibelungs (Nibelungenhalle).
In early February 1945, in the company of the former Crown Princess Cecilie, August Wilhelm fled the approaching Red Army by going from Potsdam to Kronberg to take refuge with his aunt Princess Margaret of Prussia, a sister of his father.
Post-war life

At the end of the Second World War, on 8 May 1945, August Wilhelm was arrested by the U.S. Army and imprisoned in Ludwigsburg.
A young German Jewish refugee started his interrogation as an American soldier.
Immediately after his release, new proceedings were instituted against August Wilhelm.
With his wife, Princess Alexandra of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg, Prince August Wilhelm had one son:


Regimental commissions until First World War

Chivalric orders

Ancestry

References

External links
