Duke Adolf Friedrich Albrecht Heinrich of Mecklenburg-Schwerin (German: Adolf Friedrich Albrecht Heinrich, Herzog zu Mecklenburg-Schwerin; 10 October 1873 – 5 August 1969), was a German explorer in Africa, a colonial politician,  and the first president of the National Olympic Committee of West Germany (1949–1951).
Biography

Born in Schwerin, Adolf Friedrich was the third child of Frederick Francis II, Grand Duke of Mecklenburg-Schwerin (1823–1883), and his third wife Princess Marie of Schwarzburg-Rudolstadt.
Explorer of Africa

From 1907 to 1908, Adolf Friedrich led a scientific research expedition in the region of the Central African Graben and traversed  Africa from east to west.
Adolf Friedrich and his companions explored the then little-known primeval forest region of the Congo tributaries and the basin of Lake Chad.
From 1912 to 1914, Adolf Friedrich was the last governor of Togoland in German West Africa; he was invited for the official celebration of the independence of Togo in 1960.
Duke candidate for the planned United Baltic Duchy

At the end of the First World War, in the autumn of 1918, the Duke was offered the throne of the United Baltic Duchy, a short-lived client-state proclaimed on Baltic territories under German occupation.
By the autumn of 1918, the Duke was approached by Heinrich von Stryk, a representative of the Baltic German nobility, but final steps towards implementation of their plans were undertaken on 5 November, when representatives of Baltic Germans and some pro-German oriented leaders among Estonian and Latvian politicians from Courland, Livonia and Estonia met in Riga and proclaimed the creation of the United Baltic Duchy.
Since the Duke was in Germany, the temporary regency council (Regentschaftsrat) was established in Riga, headed by baron Adolf Pilar von Pilchau, and consisting of three Baltic Germans, three Estonians and three Latvians.
Since Germany lost the War by 11 November, the Duke never assumed the Baltic throne.
Member of the International Olympic Committee

Adolf Friedrich then served as a member of the International Olympic Committee from 1926 to 1956 and as the first president of the National Olympic Committee of Germany from 1949 to 1951.
Personal life

Adolf Friedrich was married twice.
In Gera on 24 April 1917, he married Princess Viktoria Feodora of Reuss-Schleiz (1889-1918), daughter of Heinrich XXVII, Prince Reuss Younger Line and Princess Elise of Hohenlohe-Langenburg.
He later married the widow of his half-brother Duke John Albert, Princess Elisabeth of Stolberg-Rossla, on 15 October 1924; they were among the guests at 
the 1937 wedding of Juliana of the Netherlands and Prince Bernhard of Lippe-Biesterfeld.
Princess Elisabeth survived her husband by only a few weeks after his death in Eutin in 1969.
Legacy

Adolf Friedrich is commemorated in the scientific names of a genus of lizards, Adolfus, and of a species of chameleon, Kinyongia adolfifriderici, as well as in the cichlid Haplochromis adolphifrederici, and in the large tree species Aningeria adolfi-friederici.
