Frederica of Hanover (German: Friederike Luise;
Greek: Φρειδερίκη Λουΐζα, romanized: Phreideríkē Louḯza; 18 April 1917 – 6 February 1981) was Queen of Greece from 1 April 1947 until 6 March 1964 as the wife of King Paul and Queen Mother of Greece from 6 March 1964, when her son Constantine II became King, until 8 December 1974, when the monarchy was officially abolished after a referendum.
Granddaughter of Kaiser Wilhelm II and daughter of Duke Ernest Augustus of Brunswick, Frederica was born a few months before the fall of the German Empire.
In Florence, she was received by Princess Helen of Greece and Denmark, at whose house she met the Crown Prince of Greece, Paul.
The two fell in love and married two years after the restoration of the monarchy in Greece.
In the years that followed, she gave birth to three children, Sophia in 1938, Constantine in 1940 and Irene in 1942.
During the Second World War, Greece was occupied by the Axis powers.
The Greek royal family left the country and Frederica and her children settled first in South Africa and from 1943 in Egypt.
The changing political situation in Greece, with the rise of the EAM and the KKE, challenged the institution of the monarchy.
In the period of civil war that followed, Frederica developed a strong social activity to support the efforts of the government and the Crown.
However, according to the prevailing historiographical view, she continued to influence the fate of the country through her son, now King Constantine II.
Frederica was widely regarded as Constantine's éminence grise and continued to be attacked by the opposition, who blamed her for the tensions between the palace and the government of Georgios Papandreou (1964–1965).
Early life

Born Her Royal Highness Friederike Luise, Princess of Hanover, Princess of Great Britain and Ireland, and Princess of Brunswick-Lüneburg on 18 April 1917 in Blankenburg am Harz, in the German Duchy of Brunswick, she was the only daughter and third child of Ernest Augustus, then reigning Duke of Brunswick, and his wife Princess Viktoria Luise of Prussia, herself the only daughter of the German Emperor Wilhelm II.
In 1933 Frederica joined the Jungmädelbund, the Nazi organisation for girls aged 10–14.
In 1934, Adolf Hitler, in his ambition to link the British and German royal houses, asked for Frederica's parents to arrange for the marriage of their seventeen-year-old daughter to the Prince of Wales.
In her memoirs, Frederica's mother described that she and her husband were "shattered" and such a possibility "had never entered our minds".
Moreover, the age difference was too great (the Prince of Wales was twenty-three years Frederica's senior), and her parents were unwilling to "put any such pressure" on their daughter.
Marriage

Prince Paul of Greece proposed to her during the summer of 1936, while he was in Berlin attending the 1936 Summer Olympics.
Paul was a son of King Constantine I and Frederica's great aunt Sophia.
They were also paternal second cousins as great-grandchildren of Christian IX of Denmark.
Frederica became Hereditary Princess of Greece, her husband being heir presumptive to his childless elder brother, King George II.
Ten months after their marriage, their first child, the future Queen Sofía of Spain (and future mother of Felipe VI), was born on 2 November 1938.
On 2 June 1940, Frederica gave birth to the future King Constantine II.
Frederica and her family were evacuated again, setting up a government-in-exile office in London.
Here Frederica's last child, Princess Irene, was born on 11 May 1942.
The Hereditary Prince and Princess returned to their villa in Psychiko.
Queen consort

On 1 April 1947, George II died and Frederica's husband ascended the throne as Paul I, with Frederica as queen consort.
A Communist insurgency in Northern Greece led to the Greek Civil War.
The King and Queen toured Northern Greece under tight security to appeal for loyalty in the summer of 1947.
Queen Frederica was constantly attacked for her German ancestry.
Left-wing politicians in Greece repeatedly used the fact that the Kaiser was her grandfather, and that she had brothers who were members of the SS, as propaganda against her.
When she was in London representing her sick husband at the wedding of his first cousin Prince Philip of Greece and Denmark to King George VI's elder daughter Princess Elizabeth in November 1947, Winston Churchill remarked on the Kaiser being her grandfather.
Queen Frederica had replied acknowledging the fact, but reminding him that she was also descended from Queen Victoria, and that her father would be the British king if the country had operated under Salic Law (allowing only males to inherit the crown).
In fact, Frederica held the title Princess of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, granted ad personam to the children of the then-Duke of Brunswick by George V's letters patent of 1914, which remained unrevoked.
During the civil war, Queen Frederica set up the Queen's Camps or Child Cities (translation of: Παιδο(υ)πόλεις / Paidopoleis or Paidupoleis), a network of 53 camps around Greece where she would rescue children of members of the Democratic Army and former partisans.
The Greek Civil War ended in August 1949.
The King and Queen took this opportunity to strengthen the monarchy, and paid official visits to Marshal Josip Broz Tito in Belgrade, Presidents Luigi Einaudi of Italy in Rome, Theodor Heuss of West Germany, and Bechara El Khoury of Lebanon, Emperor Haile Selassie I of Ethiopia, Governor-General Chakravarthi Rajagopalachari of India, King George VI of the United Kingdom, and the United States as guest of President Dwight D. Eisenhower.
However, at home in Greece and abroad in the United Kingdom, Queen Frederica was targeted by the opposition, because as a girl she had belonged to the Bund Deutscher Mädel (League of German Girls), a branch of the Hitler Youth group for young women; her supporters argued that evading membership in the group would be difficult under the existing political climate in Nazi Germany at the time.
Unlike her meek husband, in post-War Greece Frederica was one of the most hated public figures.
Frederica has been described as "inherently undemocratic".
At home in Greece and abroad in the United Kingdom, she was targeted by the opposition.
Frederica's 16 November 1953 appearance in Life as America's guest was taken on one of the many state visits she paid around the world.
On 14 May 1962, her eldest daughter Sofía married Prince Juan Carlos of Spain (later King Juan Carlos I of Spain) in Athens.
Queen dowager

On 6 March 1964, King Paul died of cancer.
When her son, King Constantine II, married Princess Anne-Marie of Denmark later that year on 18 September, Queen Frederica stepped back from the majority of her public duties in favor of her daughter-in-law.
However, she continued to attend royal events that were family-oriented, such as the baptisms of her grandchildren in both Spain and Greece.
Exile

 King Constantine II's clashes with the democratically elected Prime Minister George Papandreou Sr. were blamed by critics for causing the destabilisation that led to a military coup on 21 April 1967 and the rise of the regime of the colonels.
Faced with a difficult situation, King Constantine initially collaborated with the military dictatorship,  swearing in their government under a royalist prime minister.
In 1971, Frederica published an autobiography, A Measure of Understanding.
The head of the junta became the new head-of-state as President of Greece George Papadopoulos.
A plebiscite was held on 8 December 1974 in which Constantine (who was able to campaign only from outside the country) freely admitted past errors, and promised to support democracy.
However, 69% of Greeks freely voted to make Greece a democratic republic.
Death

Frederica died on 6 February 1981 in exile in Madrid of heart failure, reportedly following eyelid surgery (blepharoplasty), although a biographer has claimed the surgery was cataract removal.
She was interred at Tatoi (the royal family's palace and burial ground in Greece).
