Margaret of Prussia (German: Margarethe Beatrice Feodora; 22 April 1872 – 22 January 1954) was the youngest child of Frederick III, German Emperor, and Victoria, Princess Royal.
She was also the younger sister of Emperor Wilhelm II and the granddaughter of Queen Victoria.
She married Prince Frederick Charles of Hesse, the elected King of Finland, making her the would-be Queen of Finland had he not decided to renounce the throne on 14 December 1918.
In 1926, they assumed the titles of Landgrave and Landgravine of Hesse.
Early life

Princess Margaret of Prussia was the youngest of eight children born to Frederick III, then Crown Prince of the German Empire, and Victoria, Princess Royal, Britain's Queen Victoria's eldest daughter.
Born on 22 April 1872 in the Hohenzollerns' New Palace in Potsdam, by the time the infant was christened, her head was covered with short hair like moss, from which she acquired her nickname "Mossy".
Crown Princess Margherita of Italy was her godmother and Emperor Pedro II of Brazil was her godfather.
Princess Margaret grew up amid great privilege and formality.
Together with her sisters, Princess Viktoria and Princess Sophie, Margaret was deeply attached to her parents, forming an antagonist group to that of her eldest siblings, William II, Princess Charlotte and Prince Henry.
Margaret was widely regarded as the most popular of Kaiser Wilhelm II's sisters, and she maintained good relations with a wide array of family members.
She was the first cousin of both King George V of the United Kingdom and Empress Alexandra of Russia, all three being grandchildren of Victoria.
As an adult, she was said to resemble her aunt, Princess Alice.
Marriage

Princess Margaret was first attracted to Prince Maximilian of Baden.
When he did not reciprocate her affection, she moved on to her second choice, Max's close friend, Prince Frederick Charles of Hesse, future head of the Hesse-Kassel dynasty and future elected King of Finland.
At the time of the wedding, Prince Frederick Charles was not the Head of the House of Hesse-Kassel.
Prince Frederick Charles, as was his title when he married, was addressed as His Highness, while Princess Margaret warranted Royal Highness.
This disparity came to an end in 1925 when Frederick Charles became Landgrave of Hesse and Head of the house of Hesse-Kassel.
They were second cousins, both great-grandchildren of King Friedrich Wilhelm III of Prussia, he through his mother Anna, she through her father Friedrich.
Initially, her brother Wilhelm opposed the match as he felt that Frederick Charles's position was too "minor" for the Kaiser's sister.
Later, however, he gave his blessing, since Margaret herself "was so unimportant".
Princess Margaret had a strong personality; she always seemed more secure and grounded than her husband.
Margaret's husband was her mother's favorite son-in-law.
In 1901, Princess Margaret inherited Schloss Friedrichshof at the death of her mother.
However, Margaret was committed to maintain the house of her mother which entailed a great expense and the family moved to Friedrichshof.
In 1918, Margaret's husband accepted the offer of the throne of newly independent Finland, but due to German misfortunes in World War I, soon renounced it.
Family tragedies

Margaret's elder sons, Friedrich Wilhelm and Maximilian, were killed in action during World War I. Prince Maximilian, Princess Margaret's second and favorite son, was serving near Aisne when he was seriously wounded by machine gun fire in October 1914.
Princess Margaret's oldest son, Friedrich Wilhelm, died on 12 September 1916 at Kara Orman in Romania.
Her two other sons, Philipp and Christoph, embraced Nazism, and Margaret, who was the sister of the last Kaiser Wilhelm II, invited Adolf Hitler to tea and flew the swastika from her home at Schloss Kronberg.
Philipp married Princess Mafalda, daughter of King Victor Emmanuel III of Italy.
Margaret's fifth son, Christoph, was a staunch supporter of the German war effort, but after the Battle of Stalingrad, he became frustrated by the limitations placed on his own role in the conflict, and increasingly critical of the German leadership.
Christoph's reaction to the assassination of Heydrich, whom he called a "dangerous and cruel man", in 1942 was that it was "the best news I had in a long time".
He was married to Princess Sophie of Greece, sister of Philip, Prince of Greece and Denmark who, in 1947, married the heir to the throne of the United Kingdom and, in 1952, became Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, consort of Queen Elizabeth II.
Margaret also lost another one of her daughters-in-law during the war.
Wolfgang's wife, Princess Marie Alexandra, when she and seven other women war aid workers, were killed in a bomb attack on Frankfurt on 29–30 January 1944.
Margaret, very much the matriarch, was at the centre of her large and dynamic family.
Last years

Landgravine Margaret had difficult years after 1945; they were compounded by the theft from Schloss Friedrichshof in November 1945 of the family jewellery, valued at over £2,000,000.
Princess Margaret's son Wolfgang, fearing for the jewels, had buried them in a sub-cellar of the castle.
In early 1946, Princess Margaret discovered the theft when the family wanted to use the jewels for the wedding of Princess Sophia who was preparing to remarry.
Princess Sophia and Landgravine Margaret reported it to the Frankfurt authorities, and the culprits were imprisoned in August 1951.
The Hesse family received what had been recovered: only 10 percent of what had been stolen.
Landgravine Margaret, the last surviving child of Emperor Frederick III and last grandchild of emperor Emperor Wilhelm I, died in Kronberg on 22 January 1954, 14 years after her husband and exactly 53 years to the day after her British grandmother Queen Victoria.
Children

Landgravine Margaret and her husband Frederick Charles of Hesse had six sons, including two sets of twins:


Archives

Margaret's personal papers (including family correspondence) are preserved in the Archive of the House of Hesse, which is kept in Fasanerie Palace in Eichenzell, Germany.
