David Henry George Lascelles, 8th Earl of Harewood (born 21 October 1950), styled as Viscount Lascelles until July 2011, is a British hereditary peer and film and television producer.
Early life and earldom

David Henry George Lascelles was born at his parents' London house, 2 Orme Square, Bayswater, London, on 21 October 1950.
He is the eldest son of the 7th Earl of Harewood and his first wife, Marion Stein.
He was baptised at All Saints' Church, Harewood.
His godparents were The Princess Elizabeth, Duchess of Edinburgh (later Queen Elizabeth II), his great-grandmother Queen Mary, his great-aunt Viscountess Boyne (Margaret Hamilton-Russell), his uncle Gerald Lascelles and Benjamin Britten.
He is a second cousin of King Charles III and a great-grandson of King George V.


He succeeded to the Earldom of Harewood on the death of his father in July 2011.
Career and other activities

Lascelles is a film and television producer.
In 2007, as part of the commemoration of the bi-centenary of the Abolition of the Slave Trade Act, Lascelles was executive producer of the theatrical project by Geraldine Connor entitled Carnival Messiah that was staged in the grounds of Harewood House, which was built in the 18th century with funds from slave trading.
Following Connor's death in 2011, Lascelles organised a concert in her memory at West Yorkshire Playhouse, and he is a founder and patron of the Geraldine Connor Foundation, established in 2012 to continue her work and vision by bringing people together through arts and culture.
As Earl of Harewood, he continues the tradition begun by his father in 1961 by serving as the honorary lifetime president of Leeds United Football Club.
It is on display in one of the bookcases at Harewood House.
Personal life

On 12 February 1979, at St Mary's Church, Paddington, London, Lascelles married Margaret Rosalind Messenger, Viscountess Lascelles, daughter of Edgar Frank Messenger.
Their children are:


In 1990, Lascelles married artist Diane Howse, now the Countess of Harewood.
