Prince Archie of Sussex (Archie Harrison Mountbatten-Windsor; born 6 May 2019) is a member of the British royal family.
He is the son of Prince Harry, Duke of Sussex, and Meghan, Duchess of Sussex.
A grandson of King Charles III, he is sixth in the line of succession to the British throne.
Birth, family and infancy

Archie Harrison Mountbatten-Windsor was born at 05:26 (BST) (04:26 UTC) on 6 May 2019 at Portland Hospital in London.
He is the first child of Prince Harry, Duke of Sussex and Meghan, Duchess of Sussex.
Archie has mixed-race ancestry, with African-American and European-American maternal lineage, and holds dual citizenship of the United Kingdom and the United States.
Archie's parents brought him to meet his great-grandparents Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip for the first time when he was two days old.
Four of the godparents were later reported to be Charlie van Straubenzee, Tiggy Pettifer, Mark Dyer, and the 7th Duke of Westminster.
In early 2020, Archie's parents stepped down from their roles as working members of the royal family.
Public appearances

In September and October 2019, Archie accompanied his parents on a Southern African tour to Malawi, Angola, South Africa and Botswana.
Title and styles

As heir apparent to his father's dukedom of Sussex, earldom of Dumbarton, and barony of Kilkeel, Archie was at birth and by custom entitled to use Prince Harry's senior subsidiary title, Earl of Dumbarton, as a courtesy.
However, the media reported that the Duke and Duchess decided, instead, that Archie would be styled as Master Archie Harrison Mountbatten-Windsor, in accordance with their reported wish that he grow up as a private citizen.
Upon the accession of Charles III, Archie became entitled to use the title prince and style Royal Highness, as the child of a son of the monarch, pursuant to letters patent issued by King George V in 1917.
However, sources reported that it was unclear whether he would use that title and style, noting that not all members of the royal family who are eligible for a title choose to use one.
In the interview Oprah with Meghan and Harry, the Duchess of Sussex said that she had been told that changes would be made to remove that entitlement; Charles III's plans for a scaled-down royal family dated back to the 1990s.
The official website of the royal family was updated to refer to him as "Prince Archie of Sussex" on 9 March 2023.
