Prince Karl Franz Josef Wilhelm Friedrich Eduard Paul of Prussia (15 December 1916 – 23 January 1975) was the only child of Prince Joachim of Prussia and Princess Marie-Auguste of Anhalt.
He was also a grandson of Wilhelm II, German Emperor.
Early life

Prince Karl Franz was born on 15 December 1916 in Potsdam.
He was the only child born to Prince Joachim of Prussia and Princess Marie-Auguste of Anhalt and was the Emperor's fourth grandchild to be born since World War I began; he was consequently very young when Hohenzollern fortunes fell.
His grandfather abdicated in 1918, and his father, Prince Joachim, committed suicide in 1920.
At the time of his grandfather's abdication, Prince Karl Franz was twelfth in line of succession to the German and Prussian thrones.
After his father's suicide, Karl Franz was taken into custody by his paternal uncle, Prince Eitel Friedrich of Prussia.
As the legal head of the House of Hohenzollern, he claimed this right because Emperor Wilhelm had issued an edict placing Hohenzollern powers in Eitel's hands.
Eitel's defence had also stated that Marie-Auguste was not a fit person for Karl Franz's guardianship.
Marie-Auguste went to court however and made a plea that she was heartbroken, which may have helped win the case for her.
In 1922, Marie-Auguste sued ex-Emperor Wilhelm for financial support that had been promised in her and Joachim's marriage contract.
Wilhelm's attorney argued that the House of Hohenzollern laws were no longer valid, and therefore there was no obligation to support her.
In World War II, Karl Franz served as a lieutenant in an armoured car division, and at one point was stationed on the Polish front.
Marriages

First

On 1 October 1940, Karl Franz married Princess Henriette Hermine Wanda Ida Luise of Schönaich-Carolath.
She was the daughter of Princess Hermine Reuss of Greiz, who had been the second wife of Karl Franz's grandfather Emperor Wilhelm II since 1922 (Henriette was thus Kaiser Wilhelm's stepdaughter).
Held at Wilhelm's private residence without much ceremony, he and Hermine attended the ceremony, as did a few other guests.
Second

Karl Franz married secondly, on 9 November 1946, to Luise Dora Hartmann (5 September 1909 Hamburg, Germany –
Third

Karl Franz married lastly, on 20 July 1959 in Lima, Peru, Eva Maria Herrera y Valdeavellano (10 June 1922 Lima, Peru – 6 March 1987 Lima, Peru).
They were married until Prince Karl's death and had two daughters:


Ancestry

References
