Princess Sophie Louise of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach (20 March 1911 – 21 November 1988) was a princess of the House of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach.
She was born in Weimar, the eldest child and only daughter of William Ernest, Grand Duke of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach, by his second wife, Princess Feodora of Saxe-Meiningen.
As a relative of Wilhelmina of the Netherlands, Sophie was invited to the 1937 wedding of her daughter, Princess Juliana, as a bridesmaid.
She became entangled in a diplomatic scandal however after the passports of Sophie and two other German princesses were withheld by the Nazi government.
Though they were later released, Sophie opted out of attending at the last moment.
In 1938 Sophie married Friedrich Günther, Prince of Schwarzburg, but the couple were divorced by the end of the year.
Juliana's wedding

Invitation

Preparations for the wedding of Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands's only child Crown Princess Juliana to the German Prince Bernhard of Lippe-Biesterfeld were under way in 1937 when a small diplomatic scandal occurred.
These included Sophie herself (her and Bernhard's second cousin), Duchess Thyra of Mecklenburg-Schwerin (her second cousin), Grand Duchess Kira Kirillovna of Russia (her first cousin once removed), Duchess Woizlawa of Mecklenburg (her cousin), and two of Bernhard's first cousins, Princess Sieglinde of Lippe and Princess Elisabeth of Lippe.
Diplomatic scandal

Sophie became entangled in the small diplomatic scandal as preparations for the Dutch wedding commenced.
The German Nazi government, apparently outraged that their flag was not used in festivities related to the wedding, refused to release the passports of Sophie, along with those of Bernard's cousins Princesses Sieglinde and Elizabeth zur Lippe.
Though the passports were released, Sophie for unknown reasons revoked her acceptance and stated she could no longer attend the wedding at the last moment.
Princess Sophie was replaced as bridesmaid by Baroness von Heeckeren van Kell, one of Juliana's ladies-in-waiting.
Marriage

On 7 March 1938 at Heinrichau, Schlesien, Sophie married Friedrich Günther, Prince of Schwarzburg.
Consequently, his sister Marie Antoinette controversially succeeded him as Princess of Schwarzburg.
Sophie died on 21 November 1988 in Hamburg.
