Princess Feodora of Saxe-Meiningen (Feodora Karola Charlotte Marie Adelheid Auguste Mathilde; 29 May 1890 – 12 March 1972) was the eldest child of Prince Friedrich Johann of Saxe-Meiningen, a younger son of Georg II, Duke of Saxe-Meiningen, and Countess Adelaide of Lippe-Biesterfeld, a daughter of Ernst, Count of Lippe-Biesterfeld.
By marriage, she was known as Grand Duchess of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach.
Biography

Marriage

During a summer visit to the palace Wilhelmshöhe, Feodora was urged by her kinsman Emperor Wilhelm II to make a match with the widowed Wilhelm Ernst, Grand Duke of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach.
This was seen by many to be due to mutual ill will between Wilhelm and Feodora's grandfather Georg II, Duke of Saxe-Meiningen, whose morganatic wedding to Ellen Franz had displeased many royal personages like Wilhelm.
Wilhelm's disapproval was even more surprising in that he had recently allowed the marriage between a Hohenzollern dynast (Prince Frederick William of Prussia) with a much lower-ranked member of the nobility (Princess Agatha of Hohenlohe-Schillingsfürst); it was considered odd that he refused to recognize one equal marriage yet acknowledged another lesser match, especially when the latter was within his own family and subject to the rigid Hohenzollern house laws.
The Emperor's boycott of the wedding was so strongly resented in Saxe-Meiningen that, when newspapers announced that Wilhelm would not be attending the wedding, the official communication from the royal palace declared that he had never been invited.
On 14 January 1910 in Meiningen, Feodora was married to Wilhelm Ernst.
She was his second wife (his first wife Princess Caroline Reuss, Elder Line had died childless after eighteen months of marriage in 1905).
Court life


Feodora's marriage was unhappy; the Weimar court was generally considered to be one of the most stifling and etiquette-driven in Germany.
Feodora was unhappy in such an environment; at the age of 23, reports leaked out that she was staying at a sanatorium for her health.
Feodora was very popular among the middle and lower classes of Weimar; this was largely attributed to her charm and kindness to the poor and suffering.
Feodora died on 12 March 1972 in Freiburg
Issue

Feodora and her husband had four children:


Ancestry

References
