John Ulick Knatchbull, 7th Baron Brabourne, CBE (9 November 1924 – 23 September 2005), professionally known as John Brabourne, was a British peer, television producer and Oscar-nominated film producer.
Married to the elder daughter of 1st Earl Mountbatten, Brabourne was a survivor of the bombing which killed his father-in-law, mother and son.
Biography

Brabourne was born in 1924, the second son of Michael Knatchbull, 5th Baron Brabourne, and his wife, Lady Doreen Browne.
Marriage

At the end of the war, Brabourne returned to England and settled in the family seat, Mersham in Kent.
On 26 October 1946, at Romsey Abbey in Hampshire, at the age of 21, he married Patricia Mountbatten, elder daughter of Louis Mountbatten, 1st Viscount Mountbatten, later 1st
Earl Mountbatten of Burma.
Brabourne's best man at the wedding was Squadron Leader Charles Harris-St. John.
Lady Brabourne was to inherit her father's peerages in due course.
This would make Lord and Lady Brabourne among the few married couples to each hold peerages in their own right.
Also, Lady Brabourne was related to the British royal family, and her aunt Louise Mountbatten was at that time the Crown Princess (later Queen) of Sweden.
In February 1947, only months after the wedding, Brabourne's father-in-law was appointed Viceroy of India.
In November the same year, Lady Brabourne's first cousin Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, wed Princess Elizabeth, future queen of the United Kingdom.
Lord and Lady Brabourne had eight children, including Norton Louis Philip Knatchbull, 3rd Earl Mountbatten of Burma (born 8 October 1947), Lady Amanda Patricia Victoria Knatchbull (born 26 June 1957), and Nicholas Timothy Charles Knatchbull.
Career and service

In the late 1940s, shortly after leaving the army, Brabourne began working as an assistant production manager for certain television productions, mostly based on war-related themes.
John Brabourne received two Academy Award nominations for Best Picture, as producer of Romeo and Juliet (1968) and A Passage to India (1984).
In 1985, Brabourne was invested as a Fellow of the British Film Institute, an organisation he also served as a Governor.
Brabourne served as a governor of various schools, including Norton Knatchbull School (founded by an ancestor c. 1630 AD) from 1947 to 2000; Wye College in Kent from 1955 to 2000, and Gordonstoun School from 1964 to 1994.
IRA bombing

On 27 August 1979, while the family was on holiday in Mullaghmore, County Sligo, Lord Brabourne's father-in-law, Earl Mountbatten of Burma, took a number of family members out lobstering on his motorboat, Shadow V, in Donegal Bay.
Having planned to murder Mountbatten, the Irish Republican Army (IRA) placed a bomb inside the boat on the night of the 26th.
Mountbatten and several members of the party were killed the next morning when the bomb was triggered by an IRA observer onshore who was armed with a radio detonator.
The dead included Brabourne's 83-year-old mother, the Dowager Baroness Brabourne; one of his twin 14-year-old sons, Nicholas Knatchbull; and 15-year-old Paul Maxwell from County Fermanagh who had been hired for the summer as Mountbatten's boat boy.
Brabourne, his wife Patricia, and their other twin son Timothy were severely injured, but survived the attack.
Lord Brabourne died on 23 September 2005 at his home in Kent, aged 80.
His wife Patricia, Countess Mountbatten of Burma, died in June 2017.
