Prince Wilhelm Friedrich Franz Joseph Christian Olaf of Prussia (4 July 1906 – 26 May 1940) was the eldest child of Wilhelm, German Crown Prince, and Duchess Cecilie of Mecklenburg-Schwerin.
At his birth, he was second in line to the German throne and was expected to succeed to the throne after the deaths of his grandfather, Emperor Wilhelm II, and his father, Crown Prince Wilhelm, although both outlived him.
In any case, the German monarchy was abolished in 1918 when he was twelve.
He later enlisted to serve in the Wehrmacht and died in active service during the German invasion of France in 1940.
Early life and childhood

Wilhelm was born on 4 July 1906 at the Hohenzollern family's private summer residence, Marmorpalais, or Marble Palace, near Potsdam, where his parents were residing until their own home, Schloss Cecilienhof, could be completed.
His father was Crown Prince Wilhelm, the eldest son and heir to the German Emperor, Wilhelm II.
His mother was Duchess Cecilie of Mecklenburg-Schwerin.
Emperor Franz Joseph of Austria was one of the Prince's godfathers.
The selection of a nanny for Wilhelm and his younger brother, Louis Ferdinand (born in 1907) caused considerable distress within the family.
On his tenth birthday in 1916, Wilhelm was made a lieutenant in the 1st Guards Regiment, and was given the Order of the Black Eagle by his grandfather.
Two years later, when he was twelve, the German monarchy was abolished.
Wilhelm and his family remained in Germany, though his grandfather, the former Emperor, went into exile in the Netherlands.
The former Crown Prince and his family remained in Potsdam, where Wilhelm and his younger brothers attended the local gymnasium.
After graduating from secondary school, Wilhelm went on to study at the Universities of Königsberg, Munich and Bonn.
In 1926, while a student at the University of Bonn, Wilhelm joined the Borussia Corps, a student organization of which his father, grandfather, and other members of the Prussian royal family were members.
Marriage and children

While a student at Bonn, Wilhelm fell in love with a fellow student, Dorothea von Salviati (10 September 1907 – 7 May 1972).
Wilhelm's grandfather did not approve of the marriage of the heir apparent in line to the German throne to a member of the minor nobility.
Wilhelm told his grandson, "Remember, there is every possible form of horse.
However, Wilhelm was determined to marry Dorothea.
Wilhelm and Dorothea married on 3 June 1933 in Bonn.
In 1940, the ex-Emperor recognized the marriage as dynastic and the girls were accorded the style of Princesses of Prussia (although their father was not restored to his former place in the putative line of succession, his renunciation of his rights remaining valid):


Military services

During the Weimar Republic, Wilhelm inadvertently caused a public scandal by attending Army manoeuvres in the uniform of the old Imperial First Foot Guards without first seeking government approval.
The Oster conspiracy of 1938 sought to restore Wilhelm to the throne.
At the beginning of World War II, Wilhelm was among a number of princes from the former German monarchies who enlisted to serve in the Wehrmacht, the unified armed forces of Germany.
Death and reaction

In May 1940, Wilhelm took part in the invasion of France.
Shortly after Wilhelm's death, a decree known as the Prinzenerlaß, or Prince's Decree, was issued, barring all members of the former German royal houses from service in the Wehrmacht.
