Princess Beatrix*


Princess Margriet*Pieter van Vollenhoven*


Catharina-Amalia, Princess of Orange (.mw-parser-output .IPA-label-small{font-size:85%}.mw-parser-output .references .IPA-label-small,.mw-parser-output .infobox .IPA-label-small,.mw-parser-output .navbox .IPA-label-small{font-size:100%}Dutch pronunciation: ; Catharina-Amalia Beatrix Carmen Victoria; born 7 December 2003) is the heir apparent to the throne of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, which consists of the constituent countries of Aruba, Curaçao, the Netherlands, and Sint Maarten.
Catharina-Amalia is the eldest child of King Willem-Alexander and Queen Máxima.
She has two younger sisters, Princess Alexia and Princess Ariane.
Early life

Princess Catharina-Amalia Beatrix Carmen Victoria of the Netherlands was born at 17:01 CET on 7 December 2003 in the HMC Bronovo in The Hague, the first child of the then Willem-Alexander, Prince of Orange (now king) and Princess Máxima.
Upon the public announcement of her birth, 101 salute shots were fired at four places in the Kingdom of the Netherlands: Den Helder and The Hague in the Netherlands, Willemstad in Curaçao, and Oranjestad in Aruba.
On 12 June 2004, Catharina-Amalia was baptised by the Rev. Carel ter Linden in the Great Church in The Hague.
Her godparents are her uncle Prince Constantijn, Crown Princess Victoria of Sweden, the (then) vice-president of the Council of State of the Netherlands Herman Tjeenk Willink, her mother's friend Samantha Deane, her uncle Martín Zorreguieta, and her father's friend Marc ter Haar.
Catharina-Amalia's maternal grandparents, Jorge Zorreguieta and María del Carmen Cerruti, were prohibited from attending her parents' wedding in 2002 due to Zorreguieta's involvement in the regime of General Jorge Rafael Videla, but were present at her baptism, which was a private rather than a state affair.
Princess Catharina-Amalia has two younger sisters: Princess Alexia (born in 2005) and Princess Ariane (born in 2007).
Her birthdays are traditionally celebrated with a concert at the Kloosterkerk in The Hague, which is attended by ambassadors and members of the royal household and the Council of State of the Netherlands.
Catharina-Amalia's paternal grandmother, Queen Beatrix, abdicated on 30 April 2013 and her father ascended the throne.
Catharina-Amalia, as the new heir apparent, assumed the title of Princess of Orange, becoming the first to do so in her own right.
Education

In December 2007, Catharina-Amalia started attending Bloemcamp Primary School, a public primary school in Wassenaar.
After graduating from primary school, she attended the Christelijk Gymnasium Sorghvliet in The Hague, where her aunt Princess Laurentien attended.
After completing her studies at Sorghvliet, Catharina-Amalia took a gap year, during which she interned at the Orange Fund and volunteered at other organisations.
Catharina-Amalia studied at the University of Amsterdam for a Bachelor of Science degree in Politics, Psychology, Law and Economics (PPLE).
In April 2024, King Willem-Alexander revealed that Catharina-Amalia lived in Madrid in 2023 under the protection of the Spanish monarchy, while she continued her studies online, due to the threats from the Moroccan mafia, a criminal organization dedicated to drug trafficking that has been threatening to kidnap her.
In August 2024, the Dutch Broadcasting Foundation announced that Catharina-Amalia joined Amsterdam corps, a Dutch student association.
Catharina-Amalia graduated with a Bachelor of Science degree in PPLE in July 2025.
Catharina-Amalia speaks Dutch, English, and Spanish (her mother's first language).
Public life

Catharina-Amalia and her sisters attended the annual Koningsdag.
On 19 June 2010, Catharina-Amalia served as a bridesmaid at the wedding of Crown Princess Victoria of Sweden and Daniel Westling.
On the occasion of her 18th birthday in 2021, a biography of Catharina-Amalia was published.
Similar books were published on the 18th birthday of Princess Beatrix in 1956 and Prince Willem-Alexander in 1985.
The book titled "Amalia" is written by Dutch entertainer Claudia de Breij.
On 8 December 2021, Catharina-Amalia assumed her seat in the Advisory Division of the Council of State when she reached the age of majority at 18 the day before.
On 17 June 2022, together with her parents, she was among the royal guests invited to the celebrations of the 18th birthday of Princess Ingrid Alexandra of Norway.
This was Catharina-Amalia's first public engagement outside of the Netherlands and the first occasion to which she was allowed to wear a tiara.
On 20 September 2022, together with her parents, Catharina-Amalia attended Prinsjesdag, where the King addressed a joint session of the States General of the Netherlands to outline government policy for the upcoming parliamentary session.
In November 2022, Catharina-Amalia and her family visited an exhibition at Nieuwe Kerk dedicated to Queen Juliana.
In January and February 2023, Catharina-Amalia went on a tour of the Dutch Caribbean with her parents.
In April 2023, Catharina-Amalia and her sister Princess Ariane attended King's Day concert in Rotterdam.
On 5 May 2023, she accompanied her grandmother to a reception held at Buckingham Palace the evening before the coronation of King Charles III and Queen Camilla of the United Kingdom.
Catharina-Amalia attended her first state banquet, honouring King Felipe VI and Queen Letizia of Spain, in April 2024.
In June 2025, Catharina-Amalia underwent surgery after falling from a horse and fracturing her arm.
Public image

Catharina-Amalia has experienced repeated fat shaming by tabloids and on social media since she was young, most notably by the Portuguese celebrity magazine Caras labeling her as plus size.
In response to the body shaming, members of the public have expressed their support for the princess, calling the fat shaming against her unacceptable.
Annual allowance

Catharina-Amalia became entitled to an annual allowance from the Dutch state upon reaching the age of 18.
Following her high school graduation, Catharina-Amalia opted to decline the annual allowance until she completed her studies.
In May 2024, citing changed circumstances, Catharina-Amalia announced she would begin utilizing her annual allowance for staff and operational expenses, starting in January 2025.
Titles, styles, honours and arms

Titles

Honours

National

Foreign

Honorific eponyms

Geographic locations

Structures

Other

Arms

See also

Notes

References

External links

2 also Princess of Lippe-Biesterfeld
