Constantine II (Greek: Κωνσταντίνος Βʹ, romanized: Konstantínos II, .mw-parser-output .IPA-label-small{font-size:85%}.mw-parser-output .references .IPA-label-small,.mw-parser-output .infobox .IPA-label-small,.mw-parser-output .navbox .IPA-label-small{font-size:100%}pronounced ; 2 June 1940 – 10 January 2023) was the last King of Greece, reigning from 6 March 1964 until the abolition of the Greek monarchy on 1 June 1973. Constantine was born in Athens as the only son of Crown Prince Paul and Crown Princess Frederica of Greece. Being of Danish descent, he was also born as a prince of Denmark. He returned to Greece with his family in 1946 during the Greek Civil War. After Constantine's uncle, George II, died in 1947, Paul became the new king and Constantine the crown prince. Later that year, he married Princess Anne-Marie of Denmark, with whom he had five children. Constantine formally remained Greece's head of state in exile until the junta abolished the monarchy in June 1973, a decision ratified via a referendum in July, which was contested by Constantine. After the restoration of democracy a year later, another referendum was called for December 1974, but Constantine was not allowed to return to Greece to campaign. He was the second child and only son of Crown Prince Paul and Crown Princess Frederica. His father was the younger brother and heir presumptive of the reigning Greek king, George II, and his mother was the only daughter of Ernest Augustus, Duke of Brunswick, and Princess Victoria Louise of Prussia. Prince Constantine had an elder sister, Princess Sofia, born in 1938. However, since agnatic primogeniture governed the succession to throne in Greece at the time, the birth of a male heir to the throne had been anxiously awaited by the Greek royal family, and the newborn prince was therefore received with joy by his parents. He was just a few months old when, on 28 October 1940, Fascist Italy invaded Greece from Albania, beginning the Greco-Italian War. However, the Greek successes forced Nazi Germany to intervene and the Germans invaded Greece and Yugoslavia on 6 April 1941 and overran both countries within a month, despite British aid to Greece in the form of an expeditionary corps. On 22 April 1941, Princess Frederica and her two children, Sofia and Constantine, were evacuated to Crete in a British Short Sunderland flying boat along with most of the Greek royal family. The next day, they were followed by King George II and Prince Paul. George VI of the United Kingdom opposed the presence of Princess Frederica, who was suspected of having Nazi sympathies, and her children in Britain, but it was decided that Constantine's father and uncle could take up residence in London, where a government-in-exile was set up, while the rest of the family could seek refuge in the then-Union of South Africa. After a two-month stay in Durban, Prince Paul left for England with his brother, and Constantine then barely saw his father again for the next three years. The rest of the family settled in Cape Town, where the family was joined by a younger sister, Princess Irene, born in 1942. Prince Constantine, Princess Sofia, their mother and their aunt Princess Katherine were initially lodged with South African Governor-General Patrick Duncan at his official residence Westbrooke in Cape Town. In January 1944, Frederica was reunited with Paul in Cairo, and their children joined them in March of that year. After World War II and return to Greece

In 1944, at the end of World War II, Nazi Germany gradually withdrew from Greece. Instead, George had to appoint from exile a Regency Council headed by Archbishop Damaskinos of Athens, who immediately appointed a republican-majority government headed by Nikolaos Plastiras. Prince Paul, who was more combative but also more popular than his brother, would have liked to return to Greece as heir to the throne as early as the liberation of Athens in 1944, as he believed that back in his country he would have been quickly proclaimed regent, which would have blocked the way for Damaskinos and made it easier to restore the monarchy. The majority in the referendum was in favour of reinstating the monarchy, at which time Constantine and his family also returned to Greece. It was there that Paul and Frederica chose to start a small school, where Constantine and his sisters received their first education under the supervision of Jocelin Winthrop Young, a British disciple of the German-Jewish educator Kurt Hahn. That conflict was fought mainly in northern Greece. Crown Prince

Education

During the Civil War, on 1 April 1947, George died. Thus, Constantine's father ascended the throne, and Constantine himself became Crown Prince of Greece at the age of six. The first years of Paul's reign did not bring great upheavals in his son's daily life. After that age, Paul decided to begin preparing his son for the throne. In 1958, Paul gave his son a Lightning class sailing boat for Christmas. Reign

Accession and marriage

In 1964, Paul's health deteriorated rapidly. On 6 March 1964, Paul died and the 23-year-old Constantine succeeded him as King of the Hellenes. The new king ascended the throne as Constantine II, although some of his supporters preferred to call him Constantine XIII to emphasize the continuity between the former Byzantine Empire and the Kingdom of Greece. Greece was still feeling the effects of the Civil War and society was strongly polarised between the royalist-conservative right wing and the liberal-socialist left wing. Later that year, on 18 September, Constantine married Princess Anne-Marie of Denmark in a Greek Orthodox ceremony in the Metropolitan Cathedral of Athens. US Army Attaché Charles Perkins reported that military right-wing group "Sacred Bond of Greek Officers" (IDEA) "plans for coup and military dictatorship in Greece", that Constantine was aware and that the group was aware that any operation in this direction with the cooperation of the US must have the permission of the king. According to Charilaos Lagoudakis, a US State Department expert on Greece, by mid-1966 Constantine had already approved a coup plan. According to the then-US ambassador to Greece, Phillips Talbot, Constantine expressed his anger at this situation, revealed to him that he no longer had control of the army and claimed that "incredibly stupid extreme right-wing bastards with control of the tanks are leading Greece to destruction". Royal countercoup of 13 December 1967 and exile

From the outset, the relationship between Constantine and the regime of the colonels was an uneasy one, especially when he refused to sign the decree imposing martial law and asked Talbot to flee Greece in an American helicopter with his family. Johnson wanted to keep Constantine in Greece to negotiate with the junta for the return of democracy. The junta, led by Georgios Papadopoulos, on the same day appointed General Georgios Zoitakis as Regent of Greece. He was never to return to Greece as a reigning monarch. They are frightened of the Crown because it is a unifying force among the people. Following the appointment of a civilian government in November 1974 after the first post-junta legislative election, Karamanlis called a referendum, held on 8 December 1974, on whether Greece would restore the monarchy or remain a republic. The king was not allowed by the government to return to Greece to campaign for the restoration of constitutional monarchy. The funeral was generally controversial, due to the little empathy generated by Queen Frederica and the royal family, which is why the government authorized him to stay only for six hours in the country. His gesture of kissing the ground upon arrival in Greece was also polemic as it was considered an act of provocation for the antiroyalists. The naval officers approached informed Karamanlis, who sent Papagos to warn Constantine to "stop conspiring" and the former monarch denied knowledge of the conspiracy, but when called upon, Arnaoutis confirmed his contacts with officers in Greece in the presence of both Constantine and Papagos. Karamanlis chose not to publicise it in order to not destabilise the fragile democratic system in Greece. Visits to Greece

12 February 1981

The first visit of Constantine and the former royal family to Greece took place on 12 February 1981, on the occasion of the funeral of his mother, Frederica. August 1993

At the funeral of King Baudouin of Belgium, a private agreement was made between Constantine and the new conservative Greek prime minister, Konstantinos Mitsotakis, that allowed Constantine and his family to temporarily return to Greece on a holiday. The family had decided that yachting around Greece would be the best way to showcase the country to their children, who were unable to grow up within Greece. The Greek government was unaware of Constantine and his family's holiday, which had been planned and charted by Princess Alexia. Constantine and his two eldest sons, Crown Prince Pavlos and Prince Nikolaos, travelled upon a dinghy to get to the mainland, where women were not allowed to visit. Constantine and his family took a van north in order see the northernmost part of Greece, and were reportedly followed by between 50 and 100 cars. In the next village the family stopped at, a local government official told Constantine that he would be kicked out of Greece if he did not act like a tourist. The European Court of Human Rights condemned Greece for violating Article 1 of the First Protocol and awarded the former royal family compensation of €13.7 million. This committee later handed over its responsibilities to the legal representative of the royal family in Greece, retired admiral Mario Stavridis. In 1993, on the occasion of the visit of the royal family to Greece, Andreas Papandreou announced the legislative settlement of the outstanding issues. Although upheld by the Supreme Civil and Criminal Court of Greece, the decision was overturned by the Council of State. All legal remedies in Greece had been depleted. An appeal to the European Commission of Human Rights was lodged by Constantine, Anna-Marie, their five children, Princess Irene and Princess Catherine. The problem is that my family originates from Denmark and the Danish royal family haven't got a surname." Constantine and his family ultimately did not receive their Greek citizenship back. Although originally requesting Spanish citizenships, Anne-Marie eventually requested of her sister, Margrethe II of Denmark, to have Danish diplomatic passports instated in the names of the members of the Greek royal family. On 20 December 2024, over two decades after the court ruling and almost two years after Constantine's death, his descendants received Greek citizenship upon adopting the surname "De Grèce" (Ντε Γκρες; "of Greece"), which had been used by Prince Michael of Greece and Denmark, a first cousin of Constantine's father. The Greek government, through then Culture Minister Georgios Voulgarakis, tried to stop the auction, claiming that the items may have been illegally exported from Greece, but the attempt failed. Later life

Following the abolition of the monarchy, Constantine repeatedly stated that he recognised the republic, the laws and the constitution of Greece. Constantine was a close friend of his second cousin Charles III, then Prince of Wales, and a godfather to Charles's son, Prince William. In 2004, Constantine returned to Greece temporarily during the Athens Olympic Games as a member of the International Olympic Committee. Later that year, when asked whether he thought he would be the last monarch of Greece, Constantine said that it is "very hard" to determine the future. According to a nationwide 2007 survey of 2,040 households in Greece conducted on behalf of the newspaper To Vima, only 11.6% supported a constitutional monarchy. More than half of the respondents, 50.9%, considered that the dictatorship of the junta had brought benefits to Greece. That would be crazy." Later that same year, Constantine returned to reside in Greece after selling his Hampstead house. The funeral took place on 16 January in the Metropolitan Cathedral of Athens in the presence of Archbishop Ieronymos II and a congregation of 200, including ten current and former European monarchs – Philippe of Belgium, Simeon II of Bulgaria, Margrethe II of Denmark, Henri of Luxembourg, Albert II of Monaco, Beatrix and Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands, Juan Carlos I and Felipe VI of Spain, and Carl XVI Gustaf of Sweden – and members of the royal houses of Baden, Hanover, Iran, Jordan, Liechtenstein, Norway, Romania, Russia, Schleswig-Holstein, Serbia, and the United Kingdom. The problem is that my family originates from Denmark, and the Danish royal family haven't got a surname." Glücksburg, he said, was not a family surname but the name of a town. Kensington."


Constantine freely travelled in and out of Greece on a Danish passport, as Constantino de Grecia (Spanish for 'Constantine of Greece'), because Denmark (upon request) issues diplomatic passports to any descendants of King Christian IX and Queen Louise, and Constantine was a Prince of Denmark in his own right. During his first visit to Greece using this passport, Constantine was mocked by some of the Greek media, which hellenised the "de Grecia" designation and used it as a surname, thus naming him Greek: Κωνσταντίνος Ντεγκρέτσιας, romanized: Konstantínos Degrétsias. In Greece, he was referred to as ο τέως βασιλιάς or ο πρώην βασιλιάς ('the former king').