Prince Edward, Duke of Kent (Edward George Nicholas Paul Patrick; born 9 October 1935), is a member of the British royal family. The elder son of Prince George, Duke of Kent, and Princess Marina of Greece and Denmark, he is a grandson of George V, nephew of Edward VIII and George VI, and first cousin of Elizabeth II. Edward's mother was also a first cousin of Prince Philip, Elizabeth's husband, making him both a second cousin and first cousin once removed to Charles III. In 2025, following the death of his wife, Katharine, Duchess of Kent, Edward became the oldest living member of the British royal family. Edward has held the title of Duke of Kent for over 83 years. Early life and education

Edward was born at 2:05 am on 9 October 1935 at No. 3 Belgrave Square, London, the eldest child of  Prince George, Duke of Kent, and Princess Marina, Duchess of Kent. His father was the fourth son of King George V and Queen Mary, and his mother was the daughter of Prince Nicholas of Greece and Denmark and Grand Duchess Elena Vladimirovna of Russia. His godparents were his grandparents, King George V, Queen Mary, and Prince Nicholas of Greece and Denmark; the Prince of Wales; the Princess Royal; the Duke of Connaught and Strathearn (whose son, Prince Arthur of Connaught, stood proxy); and the Duchess of Argyll. Edward speaks fluent French, having been raised in a house where, according to his younger brother, Prince Michael of Kent, their mother and aunts spoke French as a matter of preference. On 25 August 1942, Edward's father, the Duke of Kent, was killed when his aircraft crashed in bad weather in Caithness. Edward, then six years old, succeeded to his father's titles as Duke of Kent, Earl of St Andrews, and Baron Downpatrick. In 1952, at the age of 16, he walked behind the coffin of his uncle, George VI, at the King's state funeral. Marina reportedly disapproved of her son's choice of bride and twice forbade the match before agreeing to the marriage in 1961. The then Prince Andrew succeeded him in this position, later known as UK Trade & Investment (or UKTI), although Andrew resigned from the post in 2011. He has been president of The Scout Association since 1975, and, together with Prince William of Wales, visited the Centenary World Scout Jamboree at Hylands Park, Chelmsford, in July 2007. His other roles include president of the RAF Benevolent Fund, the Royal National Lifeboat Institution, the Stroke Association, the Royal United Services Institute, the Royal Institution, the British Racing Drivers' Club, and patron of the American Air Museum in Britain, Royal West Norfolk Golf Club, Kent County Cricket Club, Opera North, and Trinity Laban Conservatoire of Music and Dance. Edward was colonel of the Scots Guards for 50 years from 9 September 1974 to 14 April 2024, being succeeded by the Duke of Edinburgh. Titles, styles, honours and arms

Titles and styles

Military ranks

Honours

Foreign

Civilian appointments

Wear of orders, decorations, and medals

The ribbons worn regularly by Edward in undress uniform are as follows:


With medals, Edward normally wears the breast stars of the Garter, St Michael and St George, and Royal Victorian Order.