Princess Alexandra of Greece and Denmark (Greek: Αλεξάνδρα; romanized: Alexándra), later known as Grand Duchess Alexandra Georgievna of Russia (Russian: Алекса́ндра Гео́ргиевна); 30 August  1870 – 24 September  1891), was a member of the Greek royal family by birth and of the Russian imperial family by marriage. Alexandra was the daughter of George I of Greece and Olga Constantinovna of Russia, and grew up in Athens. In 1889, she married Grand Duke Paul Alexandrovich of Russia, her first cousin once removed. The couple settled in Saint Petersburg and they had two children: Grand Duchess Maria Pavlovna (1890–1958) and Grand Duke Dmitri Pavlovich (1891–1942). Early life

Princess Alexandra of Greece and Denmark was born on 30 August  1870 at Mon Repos, the summer residence of the Greek royal family on the island of Corfu. She was the third child and eldest daughter of King George I of Greece and his wife, Grand Duchess Olga Constantinovna of Russia. Five of his sons (Constantine, George, Nicholas, Andrew and Christopher), and two daughters (Alexandra and Maria), attained adulthood. King George was a taciturn man, but contrary to the general approach of the time, he believed in happy rambunctious children. "She looked young and beautiful, and ever since she was a child, life looked as it had nothing but joy and happiness in store for her."


Alexandra's playmates were her brother Nicholas and her sister Maria, who followed her in age. In Denmark, Alexandra and her siblings met their Russian and British cousins in large family gatherings. Marriage and children

When she was 18 years old, she was married to Grand Duke Paul Alexandrovich of Russia, her maternal first cousin once removed and the youngest child and sixth son of Emperor Alexander II and his first wife, Princess Marie of Hesse and by Rhine. They had become close when Grand Duke Paul spent winters in Greece due to his frequent respiratory illnesses. The Greek royal family also frequently spent holidays with the Romanov family on visits to Russia or Denmark. The Grand Duchess was buried in the Peter and Paul Cathedral, St. Her husband later morganatically remarried Olga Karnovich. In 1939 during the reign of her nephew George II of Greece, the Greek government obtained permission from the Soviet government under Joseph Stalin to rebury Princess Alexandra in Greece.