King Albert IIQueen Paola


Amedeo of Austria-Este (Habsburg-Lorraine) (Amedeo Marie Joseph Carl Pierre Philippe Paola Marcus d'Aviano; born 21 February 1986), Prince of Belgium, is a grandson of King Albert II of Belgium, and thus a member of the Belgian royal family. He is also heir-apparent to the headship of the House of Austria-Este, a cadet branch (originally a tertiogeniture, later a secundogeniture) of the House of Habsburg-Lorraine, and is sixth in line to the throne of Belgium. Birth and family

Amedeo was born on 21 February 1986 at the Saint-Luc University Hospital in Woluwe-Saint-Lambert, Belgium, as the first child and elder son of Lorenz, Archduke of Austria-Este, and Princess Astrid of Belgium. He bears the same given name as his paternal great-grandfather, Prince Amedeo, Duke of Aosta. Amedeo himself is godfather to his cousin, Princess Elisabeth, Duchess of Brabant. Marriage

On 15 February 2014, the Belgian Royal Court announced the engagement of Prince Amedeo to an Italian journalist, Nobile Elisabetta "Lili" Maria Rosboch von Wolkenstein (b. Patrilineally, Elisabetta descends from the House of Caracciolo, as her father is a natural child of Prince Filippo Caracciolo di Castagneto and Elisabeth Jaworski von Wolkenstein (1915–1959), who at the time of his birth had been widowed for one year from Nobile Ettore Bernardo Rosboch (1893–1944), the Italian Fascist Finance Undersecretary of State. Amedeo and Elisabetta both descend from Don Giuseppe Tiberio Ruffo di Calabria-Santapau, 2nd Prince of Palazzolo, Count of Sinopoli (1627–1683) and his wife, Agata Branciforte-Colonna (1650-1720). Through German princely dynasties, their most recent common ancestor is Franz Albrecht I, Prince of Oettingen-Spielberg (1663–1737) and his wife, Baroness Johanna Margaretha von Schwendi (1672-1727), heiress of Schwendi and Achstetten. The couple's wedding was celebrated on 5 July 2014 in Rome's Basilica of Santa Maria in Trastevere, in the presence of the royal family (with the exception of his great-aunt Queen Fabiola), as well as members of the cadet branches of the House of Habsburg-Lorraine, including the bridegroom's grandmother, Margherita of Savoy, Dowager Archduchess of Austria-Este, and members of other dynasties, including Princess Margaretha of Luxembourg and her husband Prince Nikolaus of Liechtenstein, Princess Beatrice of York and Jean-Christophe, Prince Napoléon. In 1993, his maternal grandfather acceded to the throne as King Albert II and he became third in Belgium's line of succession, following his uncle Prince Philippe, Duke of Brabant, and his mother. Titles and styles

All the children of Princess Astrid and Archduke Lorenz bear the title of "Prince(ss) of Belgium", with the style of "Royal Highness", by Belgian Royal Decree of 2 December 1991, which is distinct from their traditional Austro-Hungarian titles.