Prince Michael of Greece and Denmark (Greek: Μισέλ ντε Γκρες, romanized: Michel de Grèce; 7 January 1939 – 28 July 2024) was a Greek historian, author, and member of the Greek royal family. He was a first cousin, among others, of Kings George II of Greece, Paul of Greece, their sister,  Queen Helen, Queen Mother of Romania, in addition to Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh and also of Prince Henri d'Orléans. Birth and family

Michael was born in Rome to Prince Christopher of Greece and Denmark (youngest son of King George I of Greece) and his second wife, Princess Françoise d'Orléans (daughter of the Orleanist claimant to the defunct French throne, Jean d'Orléans, Duke of Guise). His godparents were his two first cousins Queen Helen, Queen Mother of Romania and King George II of Greece (eldest children of his paternal uncle King Constantine I). About eight months before her father's death, Françoise was widowed by the death of Prince Christopher, following an abscess of the lung, in Athens in January. She took Michael to join her mother's household in Larache where her elder sister, Princess Isabelle Murat and her family, had also taken refuge from Europe. Henceforth, Michael was given into the care of his uncle and raised with his Orléans cousins. Following the death of his second cousin, Christian Ludwig Gustav Fritz Castenskiold (1926–2024), on 16 July 2024, he became the last surviving great-grandchild of King Christian IX of Denmark. He then re-patriated to Greece for military duty, serving for four years in the Cavalry-Tank Corps, in Athens and Thessaloniki. He inherited from his mother a half-interest in the domain of the Nouvion-en-Thiérache, once the seat of the Dukes of Guise, from whom the Bourbon-Orléans inherited the vast property, which included a grand château and a petit château, in Aisne. List of works

Having watched his mother observe a family tradition by igniting what he called a kind of auto-da-fé in which she burned his late father's papers and memorabilia following the sale of his villa in Rome after the war, Prince Michael grew up to become a biographer and historian. The couple have two daughters:


Death

Prince Michael died at a hospital in Athens, on 28 July 2024, at the age of 85. He was the last surviving grandchild of George I of Greece. He has lineage to the House of Bourbon through his mother's side of the family and the last surviving great-grandchild of Christian IX of Denmark. His immediate family – Marina Karella, Princess Alexandra of Greece, Nicolas Mirzayantz, Princess Olga, Duchess of Aosta, Prince Aimone, Duke of Aosta, and his grandchildren – attended the funeral. Other dignitaries included Queen Anne-Marie of Greece, Pavlos, Crown Prince of Greece, Marie-Chantal, Crown Princess of Greece, Princess Alexia of Greece and Denmark, Prince Nikolaos of Greece and Denmark, Princess Theodora of Greece and Denmark, Prince Philippos of Greece and Denmark, Queen Sofía of Spain, Princess Irene of Greece and Denmark, Princess Anne, Duchess of Calabria, Princess Mafalda of Savoy-Aosta, Princess Bianca of Savoy-Aosta and Mareva Grabowski, the wife of the Prime Minister of Greece, Kyriakos Mitsotakis.