The Crown PrinceThe Crown Princess


Princess Tomislav


Princess Alexander


Princess Elizabeth


Filip Karađorđević (Serbian Cyrillic: Филип Карађорђевић; born 15 January 1982), sometimes referred to in English as Prince Philip Karageorgevitch and unofficially titled Philip, Hereditary Prince of Serbia and Yugoslavia (Serbian Cyrillic: Филип, принц наследник од Србије и Југославије, Filip, princ naslednik od Srbije i Jugoslavije), is a Serbian business manager, a member of the House of Karađorđević, and heir apparent to Crown Prince Alexander. In 2020, he moved to his homeland Serbia and took a more active role in public life, often travelling across Serbia, Kosovo, Montenegro, and Bosnia. His son is the first male child born to the Karađorđević royal family on Serbian soil for 90 years. Early life and education

Prince Philip was born on 15 January 1982 in Vienna, Virginia, as the second son and second child of the last Crown Prince of the former Kingdom of Yugoslavia, Alexander, and his first wife, Princess Maria da Gloria of Orléans-Braganza, the eldest daughter of Pedro Gastão of Orléans-Braganza, a claimant to the defunct Brazilian throne, and Princess Maria de la Esperanza of Bourbon-Two Sicilies (1914–2005), a maternal aunt of King Juan Carlos I of Spain. His godparents are Queen Sofía of Spain, King Constantine II of Greece (both first cousins of his paternal grandmother), and Princess Anne, Duchess of Calabria (first cousin of his mother). In 1982, he and his twin brother were baptized by Lavrentije, Serbian Orthodox Bishop of Western Europe, at a castle in Villamanrique de la Condesa, near Seville, Spain. In 1991, Philip, with his father and brothers, briefly visited Belgrade, Yugoslavia. In July 2001, his father and step-mother moved to Belgrade, Serbia, FR Yugoslavia. After the dissolution of FR Yugoslavia (later renamed Serbia and Montenegro), Philip obtained citizenship of Serbia. Philip lived and worked in London until 2020, when he relocated to Serbia and started to work remotely following the COVID-19 pandemic in Europe. Philip married Danica Marinković on 7 October 2017 at the Cathedral Church of Saint Michael the Archangel in Belgrade, Serbia. Their witnesses were Victoria, the Crown Princess of Sweden and his brother Peter. His two godmothers, Queen Sofía of Spain and Princess Anne, Duchess of Calabria, attended the wedding. It was the first royal wedding in Serbia since the 1922 wedding of his great-grandfather King Alexander I and Princess Maria of Romania. Several members of royal families also attended, including Prince Guillaume of Luxembourg with his wife, Prince Amyn Aga Khan, Princess Jeet Nabha Khemka, and guests of the Karađorđević Royal Family and the Marinković family, including the president of the National Assembly of Serbia Maja Gojković among others. Princess Danica gave birth to their son, Prince Stefan, in Belgrade on 25 February 2018 at 10:30 am. Stefan is the first male child born to the royal family on Serbian soil for 90 years, the last such birth being that of Prince Tomislav in Belgrade in 1928. They named her Princess Marija. Public life

Prince Philip attended the reburial of his grandparents, King Peter II and Queen Alexandra, great-grandmother Queen Maria, and granduncle Prince Andrew in the Royal Family Mausoleum at Oplenac on 26 May 2013. The Serbian Royal Regalia were placed over King Peter's coffin, having Philip placed the Royal Orb and Sceptre near the Karađorđević Crown. On 17 July 2015, Prince Philip and his brothers attended their father's 70th birthday celebration in Royal Compound, Belgrade. Prince in Serbia (2020–2022)

Philip used to live in London with his family, a wife and a son, but as of July 2020, they relocated and currently live in Belgrade, Serbia. With his relocation to Serbia, Philip fulfilled the promise he gave to Serbian Patriarch Irinej to do so. In January 2020, Prince Philip voiced support for the clerical protests in Montenegro. On 22 November 2020, Philip and his wife, Princess Danica, were the only members of the House of Karađorđević who attended the funeral service of Patriarch Irinej at the Church of Saint Sava. Prince Philip and his wife were also the only members of the House of Karađorđević who attended the enthronement of newly elected Patriarch Porfirije  on 19 February 2021 in St. In April 2021, before Easter, Philip visited Kosovo to support the Serbian community there. On 13 September 2021, Philip and his wife, Princess Danica, attended Holy Liturgy led by Patriarch Porfirije in the Jasenovac Monastery in Croatia and visited the Jasenovac concentration camp and Stone Flower sculpture, becoming the first members of the House of Karađorđević who visited this memorial site from World War II. In December 2021, Philip voiced support for the environmental protests in Serbia. Devastated by time, the summer house will be rebuilt and renovated as Prince Philip has agreed with local authorities and the Government of Republika Srpska to fund it. Furthermore, on 10 February, Prince Philip and his wife met with Milorad Dodik, a Serb member of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. On 21 March 2022, Philip and his wife signed the People's initiative to ban the exploitation of lithium and boron in Serbia. Hereditary Prince (2022–present)

On 27 April 2022, his elder brother Prince Peter renounced the title of a hereditary prince – for himself and his descendants. Philip became the Hereditary Prince of Serbia and Yugoslavia, heir apparent to his father, Alexander. The ceremony took place at Casa de Pilatos in Seville, Spain, in the presence of his mother, Princess Maria da Gloria, his stepfather Duke Ignacio, his wife Princess Danica, his half-sister Countess Sol, Ljubodrag Grujić, a member of the Crown Council, Chancellor of the Orders and the Herald of the House of Karađorđević and Nikola Stanković, Chief of Staff of the Crown Prince. His father, Crown Prince Alexander, did not attend the event. The Crown Prince was dissatisfied with Peter's renunciation. A grandson of King Alexander I of Yugoslavia, Prince Michael, supported the act. On 5 May 2022, Philip and his wife attended mass at the Cathedral of Saint-Louis des Invalides in Paris in honour of Napoleon I and soldiers of the Grande Armée who died for France, by invitation from his cousin Jean-Christophe, Prince Napoléon, a descendant of Napoleon, and his wife, Princess Olympia. Afterwards, they travelled to Mileševa Monastery in southwest Serbia and Pljevlja, Montenegro, attending the Holy Liturgy in Mileševa led by Patriarch Porfirije and Metropolitan Joanikije II of Montenegro and the Littoral. Furthermore, Prince Philip gave a copy of Prince Peter's renunciation paper to the library of Visoki Dečani Monastery. In May 2023, Philip and his wife attended the Serbia Against Violence protests in Belgrade, following the Belgrade school shooting and a mass murder near Mladenovac and Smederevo.