Princess Margaret, Countess of Snowdon (Margaret Rose; 21 August 1930 – 9 February 2002), was the younger daughter of King George VI and Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother, and the only sibling of Queen Elizabeth II. In 1960 she married photographer Antony Armstrong-Jones, later Earl of Snowdon, with whom she had two children, David and Sarah, before their divorce in 1978. Early life

Margaret was born at 9:22 pm on 21 August 1930 by Caesarean section at Glamis Castle in Scotland, her mother's ancestral home. She was the younger daughter and second child of Prince Albert, Duke of York (later King George VI), and Elizabeth, Duchess of York (later Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother). Her father was the second son of King George V and Queen Mary, and her mother was the youngest daughter of Claude Bowes-Lyon, 14th Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorne and Cecilia Bowes-Lyon, Countess of Strathmore and Kinghorne. The Duchess of York originally wished to name her second daughter Ann Margaret, writing to Queen Mary that: "I am very anxious to call her Ann Margaret, as I think Ann of York sounds pretty, & Elizabeth and Ann go so well together." George V disliked the name Ann but approved the alternative, Margaret Rose. The family were widely regarded by the public as an ideal domestic unit, but unfounded rumours that Margaret was deaf and mute persisted until her first major public appearance at her uncle Prince George's wedding in 1934. Margaret was educated alongside her sister, Princess Elizabeth, by their Scottish governess, Marion Crawford. When Queen Mary emphasised the importance of education, the Duchess of York replied, "I don't know what she meant. However, the Duchess told a friend that she "regretted" that her daughters did not go to school like other children, and the decision to employ a governess rather than send the girls to school may have been taken at the insistence of their grandfather George V. And the King will never leave." At Windsor, the princesses staged pantomimes at Christmas in aid of the Queen's Wool Fund, which bought yarn to be knitted into military garments. Princess Margaret does draw all the attention and Princess Elizabeth lets her do that." Elizabeth, however, did not mind, remarking, "Oh, it's so much easier when Margaret's there – everybody laughs at what Margaret says". Afterwards, both Margaret and Elizabeth joined the crowds outside the palace, incognito, chanting, "We want the King, we want the Queen!" They joined the celebrations with their fellow British citizens, dancing the hokey cokey, the Lambeth Walk, and the conga. On 1 February 1947, she, Elizabeth, and their parents embarked on a state tour of Southern Africa. 'Romances' and the press (1947–1959)

The press avidly discussed "the world's most eligible bachelor-girl" and her alleged romances with more than 30 bachelors, including David Mountbatten, Michael I of Romania, Dominic Elliot, Colin Tennant (later Baron Glenconner), Prince Henry of Hesse-Kassel, and future Canadian prime minister John Turner. Romance with Peter Townsend

Early relationship

During the war, the King suggested appointing palace aides who were highly qualified men from the military rather than relying solely on aristocrats. The King and Queen were fond of Townsend; the King is said to have regarded the calm and efficient war veteran as the son he never had. In November 1948, they attended the inauguration of Queen Juliana of the Netherlands. A footman recalled how the King diverted the pair's picnic plans, adding that whatever the King and Queen knew about the developing relationship, most royal staff noticed it as it was obvious to them. With the widowed Queen Mother, Margaret moved out of Buckingham Palace and into Clarence House in May 1953, while the new queen and her family moved into Buckingham Palace. After George VI's death, Townsend was appointed Comptroller of the Queen Mother's household. In June 1952, the estranged Townsends hosted Margaret, Elizabeth, and Philip, at a cocktail party at their home. Marriage proposal

Private Secretary to the Queen Sir Alan Lascelles wrote that Townsend told him he had asked Margaret to marry him shortly before Christmas 1952. Margaret accepted and informed her sister, the Queen, whose consent was required under the Royal Marriages Act 1772. Queen Mary had recently died, and, after the coronation of Elizabeth II, the new queen planned to tour the Commonwealth for six months. The foreign press believed that the Regency Act 1953 – which made Prince Philip regent instead of Margaret on the Queen's death – had been enacted to allow Margaret to marry Townsend, but as late as 23 July most British newspapers, except the Daily Mirror did not discuss the rumours. The Queen was advised by Lascelles to post Townsend abroad, but she refused and instead transferred him from the Queen Mother's household to her own, although he did not accompany Margaret as planned on a tour of Southern Rhodesia. Churchill informed the Queen that both his Cabinet and the Dominion prime ministers opposed the marriage, and that Parliament would not approve a union unrecognised by the Church of England unless Margaret renounced her rights to the throne. At 25, Margaret would no longer require the Queen's permission under the 1772 Act; after notifying the Privy Council, she could marry in one year unless Parliament intervened. Churchill told Elizabeth, however, that if one could easily leave the line of succession, another could easily enter it, which he considered dangerous for a hereditary monarchy. Elizabeth told the couple to wait until 1955, when Margaret would be 25, avoiding the Queen having to publicly disapprove of her sister's marriage. Margaret worked with friends on charity productions of Lord and Lady Algy and The Frog, and publicly dated men such as Tennant and Wallace. Townsend was not the love of her life – the love of her life was her father, King George VI, whom she adored". Margaret would have been able to marry Townsend by removing her and any children from the marriage from the line of succession, and thus the Queen's permission would no longer be necessary. As prearranged by Eden, the Queen would consult with the British and Commonwealth governments, and then ask them to amend the 1772 Act. She refused when Oliver Dawnay, the Queen Mother's private secretary, asked to remove the word "devotion". In 1961, Margaret's husband was created Earl of Snowdon. The couple had two children (both born by Caesarean section at Margaret's request): David, born 3 November 1961, and Sarah, born 1 May 1964. The Snowdons experimented with the styles and fashions of the 1960s. Lord Snowdon had a series of affairs, including with long-term mistress, Ann Hills, and Lady Jacqueline Rufus-Isaacs, daughter of the 3rd Marquess of Reading. A 2009 biography of actor David Niven included assertions, based on information from Niven's widow and a good friend of Niven's, that he had had an affair with Margaret, who was 20 years his junior. Beyond extramarital relationships, the marriage was accompanied by drugs, alcohol, and bizarre behaviour by both parties, such as Snowdon's leaving lists of "things I hate about you" for Margaret to find between the pages of books she read. According to biographer Sarah Bradford, one note read: "You look like a Jewish manicurist and I hate you". As she recovered, her ladies-in-waiting kept Snowdon away from her, afraid that seeing him would distress her further. On 19 March 1976, Margaret and Snowdon publicly acknowledged that their marriage had irretrievably broken down and that they had decided to separate. On 15 December 1978, Snowdon married Lucy Lindsay-Hogg, but he and Margaret remained close friends. Early the following year, she suffered severe scalds to her feet in a bathroom accident, which affected her mobility in that she required support when walking and sometimes used a wheelchair. In line with her wishes, the ceremony was a private service at St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, for family and friends. Her lady-in-waiting, Lady Glenconner, stated that Margaret found the Royal Burial Ground at Frogmore "very gloomy" and would have wanted to be where her father was buried. Margaret's ashes were temporarily placed in the Royal Vault of St George's Chapel. Following the Queen Mother's death seven weeks later and after her funeral, they were interred in the King George VI Memorial Chapel to rest alongside her parents. A memorial service marking the tenth anniversary of the deaths of both Margaret and the Queen Mother was held on 30 March 2012 at St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, attended by Queen Elizabeth II and other members of the royal family. Critics claimed that she even looked down on her grandmother Queen Mary because Mary was born a princess with the lower "Serene Highness" style, whereas Margaret was a "Royal Highness" by birth. He recalled a conversation with Margaret in which, discussing her public notoriety, she said: "It was inevitable, when there are two sisters and one is the Queen, who must be the source of honour and all that is good, while the other must be the focus of the most creative malice, the evil sister". Following Margaret's death, her lady-in-waiting, Lady Glenconner, said that " was devoted to the Queen and tremendously supportive of her". Margaret was described by her cousin Lady Elizabeth Shakerley as "somebody who had a wonderful capacity for giving a lot of people pleasure and she was making a very, very, very good and loyal friend". The Queen decided that from then on, anyone someone in her family wanted to marry would be more or less acceptable. She also inherited pieces of art and antiques from Queen Mary, and Dame Margaret Greville left her £20,000 in 1943. In popular culture

Actresses who have portrayed Margaret include Lucy Cohu (The Queen's Sister, 2005), Katie McGrath (The Queen, 2009), Ramona Marquez (The King's Speech, 2010), Bel Powley (A Royal Night Out, 2015), Olivia Benjamin (Father Brown, 2023), and Vanessa Kirby, Helena Bonham Carter, and Lesley Manville, who all played different stages of Margaret's life during The Crown, 2016–2023.