Several of Victoria and Albert's extended descendants would become either monarchs themselves or royal consorts, earning Victoria the nickname "grandmother of Europe." Their grandson Wilhelm II, for instance, became the emperor of Germany, while their granddaughter Alix became the ill-fated empress consort of Russia. Background

Queen Victoria

The daughter of Prince Edward, Duke of Kent and Strathearn and Princess Victoria of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld, Victoria experienced the death of her father at eight months of age. Prince Albert

The younger son of Ernest I, Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha and Princess Louise of Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg, Albert spent his childhood at Schloss Rosenau, Coburg. After marrying Victoria, Albert had considerable influence over her in foreign affairs, freely corresponding with European monarchs. Marriage

Victoria was married to Albert on 10 February 1840 by William Howley, the Archbishop of Canterbury, in the Chapel Royal of St James's Palace in Westminster. Children

Queen Victoria, at times, had contentious relations with her children. According to one modern author, Queen Victoria was initially jealous of the time that Albert had spent with Princess Victoria, but in her widowhood, Queen Victoria made Princess Victoria something of her confidante. For her part, Princess Victoria had accrued hundreds of letters from her mother, to the point that shortly before her death, she had them smuggled out of Germany by her brother's secretary, Sir Frederick Ponsonby. Grandchildren

Children of Victoria and Frederick III

In 1851, at the Great Exhibition, Victoria met her future husband, Frederick. When Victoria was 15 years old, Frederick proposed to her. Upon her husband becoming German Emperor as Frederick III, Victoria became German Empress on 9 March 1888. However, only 99 days later, Frederick died of cancer. Consequently, their eldest son, Wilhelm II, became the next emperor of Germany. Children of Edward VII and Alexandra

In 1861, Princess Alexandra met King Edward VII of the United Kingdom, then called Albert Edward Prince of Wales, at the Speyer Cathedral in Germany. The three daughters of Edward and Alexandra, Louise, Victoria, and Maud, were known for being active during their youth. Alexandra did not want Louise, Victoria, and Maud to marry because her daughters had two brothers who could potentially follow Edward to the British throne. Children of Alice and Louis IV

Less than a year after her father, Albert, died, Princess Alice married Louis IV, Grand Duke of Hesse. Even after moving to Germany, Alice's love of the United Kingdom did not waver. Her children followed rules similar to those that Alice's own mother, Queen Victoria, made her follow. Children of Helena and Christian

Queen Victoria sought a suitable husband for her daughter Princess Helena, eventually choosing Prince Christian of Schleswig-Holstein. Children of Arthur and Louise Margaret

In 1879, Prince Arthur married Princess Louise Margaret of Prussia. Children of Leopold and Helen

Feeling restricted by his mother, Queen Victoria, Leopold reasoned that marriage was his best path to independence. Consequently, his mother intervened, suggesting a meeting with Princess Helen of Waldeck and Pyrmont. This strained the relationship with her mother Queen Victoria, as Victoria wanted Beatrice to be her caretaker.