Queen Margrethe II


Margrethe II (.mw-parser-output .IPA-label-small{font-size:85%}.mw-parser-output .references .IPA-label-small,.mw-parser-output .infobox .IPA-label-small,.mw-parser-output .navbox .IPA-label-small{font-size:100%}Danish: ; Margrethe Alexandrine Þórhildur Ingrid, born 16 April 1940) is a member of the Danish royal family who reigned as Queen of Denmark from 14 January 1972 until her abdication on 14 January 2024. She is the eldest child of King Frederik IX and Queen Ingrid (born Princess of Sweden). In 1967 she married Henri de Laborde de Monpezat, with whom she had two sons, Frederik and Joachim. Support for the monarchy in Denmark, alongside her personal popularity, gradually rose throughout the course of her reign, attaining around eighty per cent by the time of her abdication. She was succeeded by her elder son, Frederik X. Early life and education

Margrethe was born on 16 April 1940 at 10:10 CET at Frederik VIII's Palace, in her parents' residence at Amalienborg, the principal residence of the Danish royal family in the district of Frederiksstaden in central Copenhagen. She was the first child of Crown Prince Frederik (later King Frederik IX) and Crown Princess Ingrid (later Queen Ingrid). Her father was the elder son of the then-reigning King Christian X, while her mother was the only daughter of Crown Prince Gustaf Adolf of Sweden (later King Gustaf VI Adolf). Her birth took place just one week after the beginning of Nazi Germany's occupation of Denmark following the war invasion. Her godparents were her grandfathers, King Christian X of Denmark and Crown Prince Gustaf Adolf of Sweden; her maternal great-grandfathers, King Gustaf V of Sweden and Prince Arthur, Duke of Connaught and Strathearn; her uncles Prince Knud of Denmark and Prince Gustaf Adolf, Duke of Västerbotten; as well as her first cousin twice removed, Prince Axel of Denmark. She was named Margrethe—the Danish variation of her late maternal grandmother Crown Princess Margareta of Sweden's name—Alexandrine after her paternal grandmother, Queen Alexandrine, and Ingrid after her mother. Since her paternal grandfather was also King of Iceland and she herself a Princess of Iceland at the time of her birth, she was given the Icelandic name Þórhildur ("Thor's battle" or "Thor's strength"). The princesses grew up in apartments at Frederik VIII's Palace at Amalienborg in Copenhagen and in Fredensborg Palace in North Zealand. On 20 April 1947, following the death of Christian X, Margrethe's father acceded to the throne as Frederik IX. Heir presumptive

At the time of her birth, only males could accede to the throne of Denmark, owing to the changes in succession laws enacted in the 1850s when the Glücksburg branch was chosen to succeed. As Margrethe had no brothers, it was assumed that her uncle Prince Knud would one day assume the throne. The process of changing the constitution started in 1947, not long after Margrethe's father acceded to the throne and it became clear that Queen Ingrid would have no more children. The popularity of Frederik and his daughters and the more prominent role of women in Danish life started the complicated process of altering the constitution. The new Act of Succession permitted female succession to the throne of Denmark, according to male-preference cognatic primogeniture, where a female can accede to the throne only if she does not have a brother. Princess Margrethe therefore became heir presumptive. In 1960, with her first cousin, Princess Margaretha of Sweden, and Princess Astrid of Norway, she travelled to the United States, which included a visit to Los Angeles, and to the Paramount Studios, where they met several celebrities, including Dean Martin, Jerry Lewis and Elvis Presley. Laborde de Monpezat received the style and title of "His Royal Highness Prince Henrik of Denmark" because of his new position as the spouse of the heir presumptive to the Danish throne. By tradition, Danish kings were alternately named either Frederik or Christian. She chose to maintain this by assuming the position of a Christian, and thus named her elder son Frederik. The following year, a second child, named Joachim, was born on 7 June 1969. Among others, Margrethe is the godmother of King Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands, Crown Prince Haakon of Norway and Prince Carl Philip of Sweden as well as actress Ellen Hillingsø and politician Marcus Knuth. In 2022, the Queen announced that, from the start of 2023, the descendants of Prince Joachim will only be able to use their titles of Count and Countess of Monpezat, their previous titles of Prince and Princess of Denmark ceasing to exist. Her son, Joachim, daughter-in-law, Marie, former daughter-in-law, Alexandra, and eldest grandson, Nikolai, publicly expressed shock and confusion because of the decision, after which Margrethe released a statement in which she said that it saddened her that she had upset Joachim's family. As of April 2026, she has one dog, the dachshund Tilia, who was Prince Henrik's dog until his death in 2018 (her own dog, Helike, passed away the same year). Reign

Accession

On 3 January 1972, three days after King Frederik IX delivered his New Year's address, he suffered a heart attack and was admitted to the Copenhagen Municipal Hospital. She ascended the throne on Frederik's death on 14 January, becoming the first female Danish sovereign under the new Act of Succession. The following day, Prime Minister Jens Otto Krag led her formal proclamation ceremony from the balcony of Christiansborg Palace, in which she also announced her royal motto as "God's help, the love of the people, Denmark's strength" (Danish: Guds hjælp, folkets kærlighed, Danmarks styrke). As queen, she relinquished all the monarch's former titles except the title to Denmark, hence her style "By the Grace of God, Queen of Denmark" (Danish: Margrethe den Anden, af Guds Nåde Danmarks Dronning). In practice, nearly all of the Queen's formal powers were exercised by the Cabinet of Denmark. Every year on 1 January, a banquet was held for the government, the Speaker of the Danish Parliament, representatives of official Denmark and the Royal Court at Christian VIII's Palace at Amalienborg. On day two, a levée was held at Christian VIII's Palace for the justices of Supreme Court of Denmark and the Officer Corps of the Royal Life Guards and the Guard Hussar Regiment, followed by a levée at Christiansborg Palace for the diplomatic corps. Official duties

Up to the end of her reign, Margrethe held 72 Danish and eight foreign patronages as queen, including Aarhus Festuge, ARoS Aarhus Kunstmuseum, DaneAge Association, Danes Worldwide, the Danish Animal Welfare Society , the Danish Cancer Society , Den Gamle By, Det Classenske Fideicommis, the Danish Bible Society , Det Kongelige Vajsenhus, Diakonissestiftelsen, Foreningen Norden, Land of Legends (Sagnlandet Lejre), M/S Maritime Museum of Denmark, Moesgaard Museum, National Olympic Committee and Sports Confederation of Denmark, Nyborg Slot, Rebild National Park, the Royal Danish Academy of Music, Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters, Royal Danish Yacht Club, Rungstedlund Foundation , Sankt Lukas Stiftelsen, Vallø stift and Vemmetofte. In 2016, she contributed to a book about Denmark's history. Until her abdication, Margrethe served as colonel-in-chief of the Princess of Wales's Royal Regiment, an infantry regiment of the British Army, following a tradition dating back to 1906 when Edward VII, married to Alexandra of Denmark, appointed his brother-in-law, Frederik VIII of Denmark, colonel-in-chief of the then Buffs (Royal East Kent Regiment). Her summer residences were Marselisborg Palace near Aarhus and Gråsten Palace near Sønderborg, the former home of her mother, Queen Ingrid, who died in 2000. Immigration debate


In her New Year's address at the end of 1984, the Queen addressed the xenophobia experienced by many immigrants in Denmark: .mw-parser-output .templatequote{overflow:hidden;margin:1em 0;padding:0 32px}.mw-parser-output .templatequotecite{line-height:1.5em;text-align:left;margin-top:0}@media(min-width:500px){.mw-parser-output .templatequotecite{padding-left:1.6em}}

We have the peace, the free political life and social relations that make our country a sought-after haven for many. Sitting reign record

In July 2023, the Danish Royal House recognized Margrethe II as Denmark's longest-reigning sitting monarch. Margrethe's elder son, Frederik, assumed the throne as Frederik X. She is eligible to serve as regent in the event of the incapacity or absence of the King and Crown Prince Christian. As regent, Margrethe can perform the duties of the head of state on certain occasions, for example during Frederik and Christian's stays abroad. In October 2025, Margrethe undertook her first official visit abroad after her abdication when she visited Rome, Italy, in honour of the 10th anniversary of Queen Margrethe's Roman Prize, which aims to strengthen cultural ties between Denmark and Italy. In connection with her 80th birthday, British Vogue published an article calling her "An Unsung Style Heroine."


A 2012 poll showed support for the monarchy in Denmark remained consistently high at around 82%, compared to less than half when she acceded to the throne in 1972. Upon her abdication in 2024, tributes were paid to Margrethe, not only in Denmark, but from around the world. Archaeology

Margrethe is known for her strong archaeological passion and has participated in several excavations, including in Italy, Egypt, Denmark, Sudan and South America. She shared this interest with her grandfather, Gustaf VI Adolf of Sweden, with whom she visited multiple archaeological digs, among them in Etruria in 1962. Church textiles

Since the 1970s, Margrethe has designed and embroidered several vestments and church textiles for churches in Denmark, Greenland, Germany and England. She has designed a chasuble for Fredensborg Palace Church which was since embroidered by her mother, Queen Ingrid, and appliquéd by her sister, Princess Benedikte. Margrethe's découpage works have also been used in various books and films, including Prince Henrik's poetry collections Cantabile (2000) and Frihjul (2010). Monograms

In 2004, Margrethe designed the official monogram of her second cousin twice removed, Princess Ingrid Alexandra of Norway. She has also designed her own personal monogram; the personal monograms of her son Frederik X, daughter-in-law Mary and grandson Christian; as well as the joint monograms of the Danish Crown Prince couple as well as the Norwegian Crown Prince couple, her godson Haakon, Crown Prince of Norway, and his wife Mette-Marit. In 2000, she illustrated Prince Henrik's poetry collection Cantabile. Under the pseudonym Ingahild Grathmer (the latter being an anagram for Margrethe and the former made up of her secondary names Ingrid, Alexandrine and Þórhildur), her illustrations were used for Danish editions of The Lord of the Rings, which she was encouraged to illustrate in the early 1970s.