Ferdinand Habsburg-Lothringen  (given names: Ferdinand Zvonimir Maria Balthus Keith Michael Otto Antal Bahnam Leonhard; born 21 June 1997) is an Austrian motor racing driver and heir apparent to the headship of the House of Habsburg-Lorraine. Habsburg won the 24 Hours of Le Mans and the FIA World Endurance Championship in the LMP2 class alongside Charles Milesi and Robin Frijns in 2021. Early life and family

Ferdinand Habsburg was born on 21 June 1997 to Karl von Habsburg and Francesca von Thyssen-Bornemisza. A member of the House of Habsburg, his paternal grandparents were Otto von Habsburg, the last crown prince of Austria-Hungary, and Princess Regina of Saxe-Meiningen. His maternal grandparents are Baron Hans Heinrich Thyssen-Bornemisza and Fiona Campbell-Walter, descendant of the Campbell baronets of Airds – his cousin, Jamie Campbell-Walter, is also a racing driver and doubles as Habsburg's manager. Habsburg was baptised on 20 September 1997 in Zagreb by Cardinal Franjo Kuharić. His godparents were his uncle Georg von Habsburg; Alois-Konstantin, 9th Prince of Löwenstein-Wertheim-Rosenberg; Queen Margarita of Bulgaria; and Agnes Husslein (born Countess Agnes von Arco). Habsburg is the brother of Eleonore von Habsburg and Gloria von Habsburg. Habsburg is the heir apparent to the headship of the House of Habsburg-Lorraine, held by his father on 1 January 2007. Early career

Karting

Habsburg began his racing career at the age of 14 with the Austrian team Speedworld Academy. Formula Renault 1.6 NEC

In 2014, Habsburg made his début in single seaters, taking part in the Formula Renault 1.6 NEC Championship with Lechner Racing. Toyota Racing Series

For 2015, Habsburg contested New Zealand's Toyota Racing Series in January and February 2015 with Victory Motor Racing, finishing 11th in the championship and fifth in the rookie class with two podium finishes. Habsburg contested his final season in the series in 2017, this time driving for M2 Competition. Formula Renault 2.0 NEC

For 2015, Habsburg decided to switch to the Formula Renault Northern European Cup with Fortec Motorsports. Euroformula Open Championship

Habsburg made his debut in the Euroformula Open Championship in the 2015 season finale at the Circuit de Barcelona-Catalunya, where he finished both races in the top ten. The following year, Habsburg committed to the series full-time, racing for Drivex School. Having lost ground to the more experienced title-favourite Leonardo Pulcini during the first few rounds, Habsburg was able to achieve his first race win in the series at the Circuit Paul Ricard. FIA Formula 3 European Championship

2017

For 2017, Habsburg stepped up to the FIA European F3 Championship, racing for Carlin. On the final lap, Habsburg took the lead around the outside of the final corner at Fisherman's Bend, but braked too late and understeered into the barriers on the exit of the corner, with Sette Câmara doing exactly the same thing, handing the race win to Câmara's teammate Dan Ticktum. Habsburg eventually limped across the line fourth despite broken front suspension. 2018

Habsburg returned to the series in 2018 with Carlin, this time partnering Jehan Daruvala, Sacha Fenestraz, Nikita Troitskiy and Ameya Vaidyanathan. However, Habsburg was unable to find the form from the previous year, scoring just a lone podium at Misano and finishing 13th in the championship. Sportscar career

Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters

2019

In 2019, Habsburg signed for R-Motorsport II to race the Aston Martin Vantage DTM in the Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters. 2020

For the 2020 season, Habsburg made the switch to Audi Sport Team WRT racing the Audi RS5 Turbo DTM. This season was comparatively successful for Habsburg as he secured ten points positions, one of which was a podium in Circuit Zolder. This meant that Habsburg finished tenth in the driver's championship with 68 points, beating both of his teammates Fabio Scherer and Harrison Newey. eSports

2020

In 2020, Habsburg competed in the 24 Hours of Le Mans Virtual with Mahle Racing, driving the 2018 Aston Martin Vantage GTE alongside former IndyCar Series driver Robert Wickens and sim-racers Jimmy Broadbent and Kevin Rotting. Endurance racing

2021

Habsburg started his 2021 campaign by racing in the Asian Le Mans Series with G-Drive Racing. Alongside this, Habsburg raced with High Class Racing in the 2021 24 Hours of Daytona alongside Robert Kubica, Dennis Andersen, and Anders Fjordbach. On 26 February, it was confirmed Habsburg would compete in the FIA World Endurance Championship for Team WRT alongside Robin Frijns and Charles Milesi, driving an Oreca 07 in the LMP2 class. During the first round in the 6 Hours of Spa-Francorchamps, Habsburg and his team finished tenth and in the following race, the 8 Hours of Portimão, his team finished in fourth position. However, it was in the next race, the 6 Hours of Monza that Habsburg clinched his first LMP2 podium, finishing in second place. In round four, that being the 24 Hours of Le Mans, Habsburg and his Team WRT teammates clinched a dramatic LMP2 class win after their sister Team WRT car suffered a throttle Sensor failure on the final lap whilst in the lead of the race. The following weekend, Habsburg, Frijns and Milesi clinched the LMP2 title after scoring a third consecutive victory in the series at the 8-hour race at the same venue. Habsburg also became the first Austrian to win the LMP2 title in the World Endurance Championship. 2022

The following year, Habsburg returned to the WEC, driving the No. Parallel to his WEC campaign, Habsburg competed for Prema Racing in the European Le Mans Series. The team started the season in controlling fashion, winning the season opener at Paul Ricard, after which Habsburg described himself as "honoured", and taking victory in Imola despite Lorenzo Colombo having to serve two drive-through penalties for a pair of separate infringements. After a fifth place in Monza, Habsburg and his teammates Colombo and Louis Delétraz took yet another victory at Barcelona to extend their championship advantage. Another podium came in the penultimate race at Spa, before the team clinched the title with a victory at the finale in Portimão, meaning that Habsburg and Delétraz claimed the ELMS drivers' title. 2023

Habsburg remained with Team WRT for the 2023 WEC season, this time partnering Sean Gelael and reuniting with Robin Frijns. 2024

For the 2024 season, Habsburg stepped up to the top class in the WEC, joining the Alpine Endurance Team to drive an Alpine A424. Habsburg competed in the first round, the Qatar 1812 km, finishing eighth. Karting record

Karting career summary

Racing record

Career summary

† As von Habsburg was a guest driver, he was ineligible to score championship points. Complete Formula Renault 1.6 NEC results

(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races in italics indicate fastest lap)


Complete Toyota Racing Series results

(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races in italics indicate fastest lap)


Complete Eurocup Formula Renault 2.0 results

(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races in italics indicate fastest lap)


† As Habsburg was a guest driver, he was ineligible for points. Complete Formula Renault 2.0 NEC results

(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races in italics indicate fastest lap)


Complete Euroformula Open Championship results

(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in italics indicate points for the fastest lap of top ten finishers)


† As von Habsburg was a guest driver, he was ineligible to score championship points. Stephen's Cathedral of his grandfather, Otto von Habsburg, former head of the House of Habsburg, former Crown Prince and by pretense, Emperor-King of Austria-Hungary. The heir to the house of Austria received the knighthood from his father, Archduke Karl, Grand Master. The history of the order goes back many centuries, created by Rudolph, Count of Habsburg who reigned as Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire from 1273-1291.