Princess Eugenie, Mrs Jack Brooksbank (/ˈjuːʒəni/ YOO-zhə-nee; Eugenie Victoria Helena; born 23 March 1990), is a member of the British royal family. At birth, Eugenie was sixth in the line of succession to the British throne and is 12th as of 2026. Eugenie was born at the Portland Hospital in London. Eugenie also works privately with a number of charitable organisations, including the Anti-Slavery Collective, which she co‑founded. In 2018, Eugenie married Jack Brooksbank, a British marketing executive. They have two sons, August and Ernest Brooksbank. Early life

Eugenie was born at 7:58 pm on 23 March 1990 at the Portland Hospital in London, where she was delivered by caesarean section, to the then Duke and Duchess of York. She was baptised Eugenie Victoria Helena at St Mary Magdalene Church, Sandringham, by Peter Nott, Bishop of Norwich, on 23 December, becoming the first royal baby to have a public christening and the only one of the Queen's grandchildren not to be baptised in the Lily Font. Eugenie's parents divorced when she was six years old. The Duke and Duchess of York agreed to joint custody of their two children. After the divorce, Queen Elizabeth II provided £1.4 million to establish a trust fund for Eugenie and her sister, Beatrice. In October 2002, the 12-year-old Eugenie underwent back surgery at the Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital in London to correct scoliosis; surgeons inserted two 300-millimetre (12 in) titanium rods into her spine. Education and career

Eugenie began her education at Winkfield Montessori School, which she attended from 1992 to 1993. During her time at Marlborough, Eugenie completed three A-levels, earning 'A' grades in Art and English Literature, and a 'B' in History of Art. In 2013, Eugenie relocated to New York City for a year to work as a benefit auctions manager at the online auction house Paddle8. In the Channel 5 documentary Beatrice and Eugenie: Pampered Princesses, royal commentator Richard Kay stated that Eugenie received taxpayer-funded security while travelling internationally during her gap year. In January 2022, reports emerged that Eugenie lost her taxpayer-funded police security in 2011, reportedly following an intervention by her uncle, Charles III (then Prince of Wales). During her gap year, Eugenie's taxpayer‑funded security reportedly cost more than £100,000. Charles considered the expense excessive, as Eugenie and Beatrice were unlikely to take on major royal duties. In July 2023, Eugenie joined the advisory board of Goals House, a community dedicated to advancing the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals. Marriage and family

Buckingham Palace announced the engagement of Eugenie and Jack Brooksbank on 22 January 2018. The couple had been dating for seven years, having been introduced by friends during a ski break in Verbier, Switzerland, where Brooksbank was working. Eugenie's wedding dress was designed by the British fashion designer Peter Pilotto and the Belgian Christopher de Vos of British-based label Peter Pilotto, and was created to display the surgical scar on her back. The Brooksbanks have two sons. Their first child, August Philip Hawke Brooksbank, was born on 9 February 2021 at the Portland Hospital in London, and was delivered by caesarean section due to his mother's childhood scoliosis operation. Eugenie gave birth to a second son, Ernest George Ronnie Brooksbank, on 30 May 2023. From November 2020 to May 2022, the couple's main residence was Frogmore Cottage, which had been leased to Eugenie's cousin Prince Harry. In May 2022, it was reported that they had moved to Portugal, where Brooksbank works for Michael Meldman, and that they would again stay at Ivy Cottage while in the UK. Activities

Eugenie receives no allowance from the Privy Purse. In 2018, Children in Crisis merged with Street Child, a children's charity active in multiple countries, with Eugenie continuing as an ambassador. Eugenie and her sister represented their father at a service of thanksgiving for their aunt, Diana, Princess of Wales, in 2007. On 2 June 2011, Eugenie visited the Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital (RNOH) with her father as one of her first official engagements. Eugenie became patron of the RNOH Charity in March 2019. In January 2013, Eugenie and her sister promoted Britain overseas in Germany. In 2016, Eugenie, together with her mother and sister, collaborated with the British contemporary artist Teddy McDonald on a painting titled Royal Love. Eugenie and her sister became Patrons of the Teenage Cancer Trust in June 2016. In 2016, Eugenie visited a safe house run by The Salvation Army and met with victims of sexual abuse and modern slavery. In 2017, Eugenie became the ambassador for the Artemis Council of the New Museum, a by-invitation membership initiative focused on supporting female artists. In July 2018, in her capacity as co-founder and director of the Anti-Slavery Collective, Eugenie spoke at the NEXUS Global Summit at the UN headquarters in New York to discuss efforts to end modern slavery. In July 2019, with support from the University of Hull's Wilberforce Institute, Eugenie hosted an event at Westminster Abbey to examine the scale of modern slavery. In May 2020, it was reported that Eugenie and her husband were assisting The Salvation Army with packing food parcels during the COVID-19 pandemic. On 17 September 2022, during the period of official mourning for Queen Elizabeth II, Eugenie joined her sister and six cousins in mounting a 15-minute vigil around the late Queen's coffin as it lay in state at Westminster Hall. Titles, styles and arms

Titles and styles

As a male-line grandchild of the sovereign, Eugenie was known as "Her Royal Highness Princess Eugenie of York", with the territorial designation derived from her father's then-title, Duke of York. Since her marriage, she has been styled "Her Royal Highness Princess Eugenie, Mrs Jack Brooksbank" in the Court Circular.