John Ulick Knatchbull, 7th Baron Brabourne, CBE (9 November 1924 – 23 September 2005), professionally known as John Brabourne, was a British peer, television producer and Oscar-nominated film producer. Married to the elder daughter of 1st Earl Mountbatten, Brabourne was a survivor of the bombing which killed his father-in-law, mother and son. Biography

Brabourne was born in 1924, the second son of Michael Knatchbull, 5th Baron Brabourne, and his wife, Lady Doreen Browne. He was barely 14 when his father died in February 1939 and his elder brother, Norton, inherited the Barony. On 26 October 1946, at Romsey Abbey in Hampshire, at the age of 21, he married Patricia Mountbatten, elder daughter of Louis Mountbatten, 1st Viscount Mountbatten, later 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma. Also, Lady Brabourne was related to the British royal family, and her aunt Louise Mountbatten was at that time the Crown Princess (later Queen) of Sweden. Lord and Lady Brabourne had eight children, including Norton Louis Philip Knatchbull, 3rd Earl Mountbatten of Burma (born 8 October 1947), Lady Amanda Patricia Victoria Knatchbull (born 26 June 1957), and Nicholas Timothy Charles Knatchbull. Brabourne served as a governor of various schools, including Norton Knatchbull School (founded by an ancestor c. IRA bombing

On 27 August 1979, while the family was on holiday in Mullaghmore, County Sligo, Lord Brabourne's father-in-law, Earl Mountbatten of Burma, took a number of family members out lobstering on his motorboat, Shadow V, in Donegal Bay. Having planned to murder Mountbatten, the Irish Republican Army (IRA) placed a bomb inside the boat on the night of the 26th. Mountbatten and several members of the party were killed the next morning when the bomb was triggered by an IRA observer onshore who was armed with a radio detonator. The dead included Brabourne's 83-year-old mother, the Dowager Baroness Brabourne; one of his twin 14-year-old sons, Nicholas Knatchbull; and 15-year-old Paul Maxwell from County Fermanagh who had been hired for the summer as Mountbatten's boat boy. His wife Patricia, Countess Mountbatten of Burma, died in June 2017.