Victoria Eugenie Julia Ena of Battenberg (24 October 1887 – 15 April 1969), commonly known as Ena, was Queen of Spain as the wife of King Alfonso XIII from their marriage on 31 May 1906 until 14 April 1931, when the Second Spanish Republic was proclaimed. A princess of the Grand Duchy of Hesse by birth, she was a member of the Battenberg family, a morganatic branch of the House of Hesse-Darmstadt. She was the youngest granddaughter of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha. Unlike most members of the Battenberg family, who bore the style of Serene Highness, Victoria Eugenie was born with the style of Highness, by virtue of a royal warrant issued by Queen Victoria in 1886. Early life

Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg was born on 24 October 1887 at Balmoral Castle in Aberdeenshire, Scotland. Her father was Prince Henry of Battenberg, the fourth child and third son of Prince Alexander of Hesse and by Rhine and Julia, Princess of Battenberg, and her mother was Princess Beatrice, the fifth daughter of Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom and Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha. Victoria Eugenie was the last grandchild of a British monarch to be born in Scotland until Princess Margaret was born at Glamis Castle in Angus in August 1930. As Prince Henry was the product of a morganatic marriage, he took his style of Prince of Battenberg from his mother, who had been created Princess of Battenberg in her own right. As such, Henry's children would normally have been born with the style "Serene Highness"; however, Queen Victoria had issued a Royal Warrant on 4 December 1886 granting the higher style of "Highness" to all sons and daughters of Prince Henry and Princess Beatrice, thus she was born Her Highness Princess Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg. Her godparents were Empress Eugénie (represented by Princess Frederica of Hanover), the German Crown Princess (her maternal aunt; represented by the Duchess of Roxburghe), the Princess of Battenberg (her paternal grandmother; represented by the Marchioness of Ely), Princess Christian of Schleswig-Holstein (her maternal aunt; represented by the Countess of Erroll), Prince Louis of Battenberg (her paternal uncle; represented by the Earl of Hopetoun) and the Duke of Edinburgh (her maternal uncle; represented by Sir Henry Ponsonby). Ena grew up in Queen Victoria's household, as the British monarch had reluctantly allowed Beatrice to marry on the condition that she remain her mother's full-time companion and personal secretary. She was a bridesmaid at the wedding of her cousins, the Duke (later King George V) and Duchess of York on 6 July 1893. Her aunt Victoria, Princess Royal, wrote, "it is so grievous that  cannot take notice or open her eyes". Princess Beatrice inherited Osborne Cottage on the Isle of Wight from her mother. Engagement and wedding

In 1905, King Alfonso XIII of Spain made an official state visit to the United Kingdom. Alfonso was seated between Queen Alexandra and Princess Helena, King Edward's sister. Everybody knew that King Alfonso was looking for a suitable bride and one of the strongest candidates was Princess Patricia of Connaught, another niece of King Edward. As Princess Patricia seemed not to be impressed by the Spanish monarch, Alfonso indulged his interest in Ena, and so the courtship began. When Alfonso returned to Spain he frequently sent postcards to Ena and spoke of her approvingly. His mother, Queen Maria Christina, did not like her son's choice, in part because she considered the Battenbergs non-royal because of the obscure origin of Prince Henry's mother, and in part because she wanted her son to marry within her own family. Princess Beatrice and her daughter arrived in Biarritz on 22 January and stayed at the Villa Mauriscot where some days later King Alfonso met them. On 3 February, the king left San Sebastian to go to Madrid and Ena and her mother went to Versailles where the Princess would be instructed in the Catholic faith: as the future Queen of Spain, she agreed to convert. The treaty was executed between Spain and the United Kingdom in London on 7 May 1906 by their respective plenipotentiaries, the Spanish Ambassador to the Court of St James's, Don Luis Polo de Bernabé, and the British Foreign Secretary, Sir Edward Grey, Bt. Among other conditions, the treaty stipulated:


BE it known unto all men by these Presents that whereas His Catholic Majesty Alfonso XIII, King of Spain, has judged it proper to announce his intention of contracting a marriage with Her Royal Highness Princess Victoria Eugénie Julia Ena, niece of His Majesty Edward VII, King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India, and daughter of Her Royal Highness the Princess Beatrice Mary Victoria Feodore (Princess Henry of Battenberg)…


Article I. It is concluded and agreed that the marriage between His said Majesty King Alfonso XIII and Her said Royal Highness the Princess Victoria Eugénie Julia Ena shall be solemnized in person at Madrid as soon as the same may conveniently be done. His said Majesty King Alfonso XIII engages to secure to Her said Royal Highness the Princess Victoria Eugénie Julia Ena from the date of her marriage with His Majesty, and for the whole period of the marriage, an annual grant of 450,000 pesetas. His said Majesty King Alfonso XIII also engages, if, by the will of Divine Providence, the said Princess Victoria Eugénie Julia Ena should become his widow, to secure to her, from the date of his death, an annual grant of 250,000 pesetas, unless and until she contracts a second marriage, both these grants having already been voted by the Cortes. The High Contracting Parties take note of the fact that Her Royal Highness the Princess Victoria Eugénie Julia Ena, according to the due tenor of the law of England, forfeits for ever all hereditary rights of succession to the Crown and Government of Great Britain…


The treaty's reference to the forfeiture of Ena's British succession rights reflected neither any British government censure of the alliance nor any renunciation made by her. Although the naturalisation of Ena's father in the United Kingdom had been initiated in Parliament a week prior to his marriage to Princess Beatrice, the nuptials were completed before the naturalisation, thus the government was able to take the position that Ena was not bound by the Royal Marriages Act 1772, and therefore the British king had legal authority neither to authorise nor forbid her marriage. The king did, however, issue a royal warrant which read:


"Our Will and Pleasure is and we do hereby declare and ordain that from and after the date of this Warrant our Most Dear Niece Princess Victoria Eugénie Julia Ena, only daughter of Our Most Dear Sister Beatrice Mary Victoria Feodore (Princess Henry of Battenberg) shall be styled entitled and called Her Royal Highness before her name and such Titles and Appellations which to her belong in all Deeds Records Instruments or Documents whatsoever wherein she may at any time hereafter be named or described. The KING has been graciously pleased to declare and ordain that His Majesty's niece, Her Highness Princess Victoria Eugenie Julia Ena, daughter of Her Royal Highness the Princess Beatrice Mary Victoria Feodore (Princess Henry of Battenberg), shall henceforth be styled and called 'Her Royal Highness'; And to command that the said Royal concession and declaration be registered in His Majesty's College of Arms."

Princess Ena married King Alfonso XIII at the Royal Monastery of San Jerónimo in Madrid on 31 May 1906. Present at the ceremony were her widowed mother and brothers, as well as her cousins, the Prince and Princess of Wales. King Alfonso, King of Spain, you know that Madrid loves you. Queen of Spain

After the inauspicious start to her tenure as Queen of Spain, Ena became isolated from the Spanish people and was unpopular in her new land. Her married life improved when she gave birth to a son and heir apparent to the kingdom, Alfonso, Prince of Asturias. It has been said that he had a dalliance with the Queen's cousin, Beatrice, Duchess of Galliera, but this is disputed. Then members of the king's circle spread rumours that Beatrice had been expelled because of her bad behaviour, which was not true. Later she confided to her grandson Juan Carlos's then-fiancée, Princess Sofía of Greece and Denmark, that she was forced to attend and pretend to enjoy bullfights. In 1929, the city of Barcelona erected a statue of her in a nurse's uniform in honour of her Red Cross work (the statue has since been destroyed). In 1912, the monumental opera house and theatre "Teatro Victoria Eugenia" in San Sebastián, Spain, was named after her. On 15 January 1941, Alfonso, feeling his death was near, transferred his rights to the Spanish crown to his son, the Count of Barcelona. Ena returned briefly to Spain in February 1968, to stand as godmother at the baptism of her great-grandson, Infante Felipe, the son of Infante Juan Carlos and Infanta Sofía. Felipe became King of Spain after his father, King Juan Carlos I, abdicated in June 2014. Ena Eugenie died in Lausanne on 15 April 1969, aged 81, exactly 38 years after she had left Spain for exile. She was the last surviving child of Princess Beatrice and Prince Henry of Battenberg. On 25 April 1985, her remains were returned to Spain and re-interred in the Royal Vault in the Escorial, outside Madrid, next to the remains of her husband, Alfonso XIII, and not far from her sons, Infante Alfonso, Infante Jaime, and Infante Gonzalo. Legacy

After the death of Spanish dictator Francisco Franco in 1975, the monarchy was restored and Ena's grandson, Juan Carlos I, became King of Spain; her great-grandson, Felipe VI, is the current king. Her godchildren included the Prince of Monaco, Queen Fabiola of Belgium, and Cayetana Fitz-James Stuart, 18th Duchess of Alba. Ena left eight important pieces of jewellery written in her will that, following her instructions, would be transmitted privately to the head of the royal family successively to be worn by the following Queens of Spain. She left her other jewels to be distributed between her daughters Infanta Beatriz and Infanta María Cristina –who received Victoria Eugenie's Cartier tiara of diamonds set with pearls (or alternatively with emeralds)–. The jewels in the collection are currently the most important of the royal family and are worn by the Queen of Spain on solemn occasions. Queen Victoria Eugenia was released in Finland, Portugal and Spain.