Princess Beatrice, Mrs Edoardo Mapelli Mozzi (Beatrice Elizabeth Mary; born 8 August 1988), is a member of the British royal family. She is the elder daughter of Andrew Mountbatten-Windsor and Sarah Ferguson, and a niece of King Charles III. In 2020, Beatrice married Edoardo Mapelli Mozzi, an English-born property developer with descent from Italian nobility. They have two daughters, Sienna Elizabeth and Athena Elizabeth Rose. Marriage and family

In March 2019, Beatrice attended a fundraising event at the National Portrait Gallery in London accompanied by the Anglo-Italian property developer Edoardo Mapelli Mozzi. The only son of Alex Mapelli-Mozzi, a former Alpine skier for the Great Britain Olympic team, he is a legitimate male‑line descendant of the Mapelli Mozzi family, whose members were granted the title of Count of the Kingdom of Italy in 1913 by King Victor Emmanuel III, with remainder to all male descendants of Edoardo's great‑grandfather Paolo Mapelli Mozzi (1854–1921). Beatrice and Mapelli Mozzi became engaged in Italy in September 2019, with their betrothal formally announced by Andrew's office on 26 September. Beatrice married Mapelli Mozzi in a private ceremony on 17 July 2020 at the Royal Chapel of All Saints, Royal Lodge, Windsor. Her father's association with Jeffrey Epstein, an American financier and convicted sex offender, also affected the scale of the wedding; following Andrew's widely criticised  BBC interview and subsequent withdrawal from royal duties, the arrangements were significantly reduced. Although Andrew walked Beatrice down the aisle, he did not appear in the official wedding portraits released by Buckingham Palace. She gave birth to a daughter, Sienna Elizabeth Mapelli Mozzi, on 18 September 2021 at the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital in London. At birth, Sienna was 11th in line to the British throne, and following the death of Queen Elizabeth II on 8 September 2022, she is now 10th. Since her marriage, she has been styled in the Court Circular as "Her Royal Highness Princess Beatrice, Mrs Edoardo Mapelli Mozzi".