Louis Alphonse de Bourbon, Duke of Anjou (Spanish: Luis Alfonso Gonzalo Víctor Manuel Marco de Borbón y Martínez-Bordiú; born 25 April 1974) is regarded by French Legitimists as the head of the House of Bourbon and the rightful claimant to the defunct throne of France under the name Louis XX. His claim is based on his descent from Louis XIV (r. The rival Orleanist pretenders argue that this, as well as being born a Spanish citizen, makes Louis Alphonse ineligible for the throne. Louis Alphonse is patrilineally the senior great-grandson of King Alfonso XIII of Spain. Early life

Birth

Louis Alphonse was born in Madrid, the second son of Alfonso de Borbón, Duke of Anjou and Cádiz, and of his wife María del Carmen Martínez-Bordiú y Franco, eldest granddaughter of Francisco Franco. Alfonso was at that time the dauphin (using "Duke of Bourbon" as title of pretence) according to those who supported the claim of his father, Infante Jaime, Duke of Segovia to the French throne. On 20 March 1975, Jaime died, and Alfonso then asserted his claim to be Head of the House of Bourbon and Legitimist claimant to the throne of France. Childhood

Louis Alphonse's parents separated in 1982, and their Catholic marriage was annulled in 1986. On 7 February 1984, Louis Alphonse's older brother Francisco died as the result of a car crash in which Louis Alphonse was also injured, although less so than their father, who was driving the automobile. From that date Louis Alphonse was recognised as the heir apparent to his father by the Legitimists. As such, he was given the additional title Duke of Bourbon on 27 September 1984 by his father. In 1987, the Spanish government declared that titles traditionally attached to the dynasty (such as the Dukedom of Cádiz) would henceforth be borne by its members on a lifetime only basis, forestalling Louis Alphonse from inheriting that grandeeship. Education

Louis Alphonse took his primary studies at College Molière, a bilingual school, where he earned his baccalaureate. Louis is multilingual, speaking English, Spanish, and French (in addition to some Italian and German). In 1994, Louis Alphonse received 150 million pesetas from a lawsuit against Vail Associates, which owned the ski resort where the accident occurred. Louis Alphonse was recognised by some members of the Capetian dynasty as Chef de la Maison de Bourbon (Head of the House of Bourbon) and took the title Duke of Anjou, but not his father's Spanish dukedom. Louis Alphonse was the heir apparent to his mother's Spanish Dukedom of Franco and Grandeeship until the abolition of the titles by the Democratic Memory Law. In 2002, Louis Alphonse was elected by the French Society of the Cincinnati as the representative of Louis XVI. In addition to his Spanish citizenship, Louis Alphonse acquired French nationality through his paternal grandmother, Emmanuelle de Dampierre, also a French citizen. In 2017, Louis Alphonse stated that he wishes for the remains of his ancestors, including King Charles X, to remain at the Kostanjevica Monastery, after a movement reportedly began to have the King's remains moved to be buried along with other French monarchs in Basilica of St Denis. In 2021, Louis Alphonse attended the wedding of Grand Duke George Mikhailovich of Russia. I consider it my role as head of the House of Bourbon and heir of the dynasty that made France to speak on the issue...At a moment of decision, I hope that the monarchical legacy of which I am the trustee is still sufficiently vibrant in the heart of my compatriots to be a source of inspiration and, I must say, hope." - Louis Alphonse de Bourbon, in October 2025, amid the 2024–2025 French political crisis. Louis Alphonse describes himself as a monarchist, "but not anti-republican". In March 2018, Louis Alphonse was named honorary president of the Francisco Franco National Foundation, a position held by his grandmother, Carmen Franco, 1st Duchess of Franco, until her death in December 2017. In 2025, he offered to replace French President Emmanuel Macron saying, "My family has served France for centuries, and if France asks, I will be at its service."


Marriage and children

Louis Alphonse's engagement to marry María Margarita Vargas Santaella, the daughter of Venezuelan businessman Victor Vargas, was announced in November 2003. Although no official reason was given, it was no secret that the then king of Spain, Juan Carlos I, did not approve his cousin's claim to the French throne, nor the fact that Louis Alphonse issued the wedding invitations styled as "Duke of Anjou". Louis Alphonse and María Margarita had their first child, Eugénie, on 5 March 2007 at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Miami, Florida. Her godparents are Prince Charles-Emmanuel of Bourbon-Parma and his wife, Constance. French Legitimists recognize her as Eugénie, Madame Royale,: 47  the style commonly attributed to the eldest unmarried daughter of a king of France (in Spain her name is Dona Eugenia de Borbón y Vargas).: 47 


The couple had twin sons, Louis and Alphonse, on 28 May 2010 in New York City. In Spain, the twins are Don Luis and Don Alfonso de Borbón y Vargas.: 47 


Their fourth child, Henri, was born on 1 February 2019 in New York and was granted the title of Duke of Touraine (duc de Touraine) by his father.