The Duke of Castro  The Duchess of Castro


Prince Carlo of Bourbon-Two Sicilies, Duke of Castro (born 24 February 1963) is one of two claimants to the headship of the House of Bourbon-Two Sicilies. Early life

Prince Carlo was born in Saint-Raphaël, Var, France, the only son of Prince Ferdinand, Duke of Castro and Chantal de Chevron-Villette. Marriage and issue

Prince Carlo married Camilla Crociani, daughter of Italian billionaire Camillo Crociani and his second wife, Italian actress Edy Vessel, on 31 October 1998 at the Cathedral of Our Lady Immaculate in the Monaco-Ville ward of Monaco. The couple were introduced to each other by Albert II, Prince of Monaco. Notable guests at the wedding included Rainier III, Prince of Monaco, Albert, Hereditary Prince of Monaco (later Prince Albert II of Monaco), and Prince Laurent of Belgium. Together Carlo and Camilla have two daughters:


Prince Carlo is also a godfather to Princess Josephine of Denmark, the youngest child of King Frederik X and Queen Mary of Denmark, and attended her confirmation in 2026. He and Princess Camilla are regarded as close friends of the Danish King and Queen. Claimed headship of the House of Bourbon-Two Sicilies

In 2008, Carlo succeeded to his father's claim as head of the House of the Two Sicilies and the use of the title Duke of Castro. The dispute between the Castroan and Spanish branches of the family began after the death of the last uncontested head of the house, Ferdinand Pius, in 1960. Carlos married María de las Mercedes, Princess of Asturias, the heir presumptive of Spain, in 1901. Alfonso's line of the family (today represented by Carlo's rival claimant, Pedro) has been officially recognized as the legitimate line by the Government of Spain, the Spanish royal house, the Parmesan royal house and the Portuguese royal house, whereas Ranieri's line was recognized by many non-ruling European dynasts of former monarchies (no current monarch except the king of Spain has officially stated its view on the matter), namely the Count of Paris, Umberto of Italy, Gottfried of Austria-Tuscany, the Duke of Bavaria, the Duke of Württemberg, the Duke of Aosta, the Duke of Genoa, the Duke of Hohenberg, Prince Luiz of Orléans-Braganza and Prince Michael of Greece, as well as all other members of the Sicilian house itself. It has been argued by some that the Counts of Paris supported the Castro line simply because their own pretence to the French throne depends entirely on the same principle of renunciation as the Act of Cannes, and so it would be against their own interest to support the Calabrian line. Interestingly, most of the other outspoken supporters of the Castro line were either sons-in-law of the Count of Paris or closely related to him. Honours

Dynastic

Ecclesiastical

National

Foreign

In letters dated 21 July 2017, the Governor-General of Antigua and Barbuda issued a notice that the Duke of Castro's 2014 appointment to the Order of the Nation had been annulled. In 2020, the branch of the Constantinian Order led by Prince Carlo was alleged to have influenced the election of Patricia Scotland as Commonwealth Secretary-General, which a spokesman for the Order denied, saying "These allegations are wholly offensive and wrong".