Descendants of Prince Felix and also members of the Grand Ducal Family of Luxembourg:


Princess Joan


Descendants of Prince René:


Princess Maria Pia


Princess Marina


Descendants of Prince Louis:


Prince RémyPrincess Elisabeth


Princess Chantal
Prince JeanPrincess Virginia


Princess Beatrix*


Princess Margriet*Pieter van Vollenhoven*


Princess Carolina of Bourbon-Parma, Marchioness of Sala (born 23 June 1974), is the fourth and youngest child of Princess Irene of the Netherlands and Carlos Hugo, Duke of Parma. She is a member of the House of Bourbon-Parma as well an extended member of the Dutch royal family. Per a 1996 royal decree issued by Queen Beatrix, she is entitled to the style and title Her Royal Highness Princess Maria Carolina de Bourbon de Parme in The Netherlands as a member of the extended royal family. Early life

Princess Carolina was born at 23 June 1974 in Nijmegen. She has two older brothers, Prince Carlos, the head of the House of Bourbon-Parma, and Prince Jaime. She also has one older sister, Princess Margarita. She was baptised at the Castle of Lignières in France with Prince Claus of the Netherlands, Princess Christina of the Netherlands and Princess Marie des Neiges of Bourbon-Parma as her godparents. She moved together with her mother and her brothers and sister to Soest, Netherlands, nearby the then residence of her grandparents the former Queen of the Netherlands Queen Juliana of the Netherlands and Prince Bernhard of Lippe-Biesterfeld. Education and career

Princess Carolina studied political science at University of Amsterdam and Harvard University, and also has an M.Sc. Marriage

On 9 January 2012, it was announced that Princess Carolina would marry Albert Alphons Ludgerus Brenninkmeijer (born 16 May 1974), a member of the wealthy Brenninkmeijer family. They had two children:


Other activities

The princess has been seen regularly at important events of the royal house of the Netherlands. In 2001 she was one of the maids of honor at the wedding of Prince Constantijn and Petra Laurentien Brinkhorst; and during the baptism of their daughter, Countess Eloise of Orange-Nassau, she was the godmother of the child. She was a witness at the church wedding of her cousin Prince Floris of Orange-Nassau, van Vollenhoven, and in 2010, was named as the godmother of Floris' second child, Eliane. In 1996 she was incorporated into the Dutch nobility by her aunt Queen Beatrix, with the highest title of nobility Prinses de Bourbon de Parme (Princess of Bourbon-Parma) and styled Hare Koninklijke Hoogheid (Her Royal Highness). Ancestry

References

External links

2 also Princess of Lippe-Biesterfeld