Princess Cecilie of Greece and Denmark (Greek: Καικιλία, romanized: Kaikilía; 22 June 1911 – 16 November 1937) was by birth a Greek and Danish princess who became titular Hereditary Grand Duchess of Hesse and by Rhine through her marriage to Prince Georg Donatus, pretender to the throne of the Grand Duchy of Hesse. She was also the third-eldest sister to Prince Philip of Greece and Denmark (later Duke of Edinburgh). The third of five children of Prince Andrew of Greece and Denmark and Princess Alice of Battenberg, Cecilie had a happy childhood. She formed a relationship with her maternal cousin, Georg Donatus, Hereditary Grand Duke of Hesse. There she gave birth to their three children, Ludwig (1931–1937), Alexander (1933–1937) and Johanna (1936–1939), before becoming pregnant with her fourth child in 1937. Soon after, the princess and her family (except for Johanna who stayed behind),  embarked on a trip to the United Kingdom, where they were to attend the wedding of her brother-in-law Louis, Prince of Hesse and by Rhine, to Margaret Campbell Geddes. Johanna was adopted by her uncle but died from meningitis in 1939. Biography

Childhood

The Balkan Wars and the First World War

The third daughter of Prince Andrew of Greece and Denmark and Princess Alice of Battenberg, Cecilie was born at Tatoi Palace, near Athens, on 22 June 1911. Baptised on 10 July, her godparents were King George V of the United Kingdom, Ernest Louis, Grand Duke of Hesse, Prince Nicholas of Greece and Denmark and Grand Duchess Vera Konstantinovna of Russia. Cecilie's early years were marked by the instability that the Kingdom of Greece experienced at the start of the twentieth century. Between 1912 and 1913, Greece engaged in the Balkan Wars, during which Prince Andrew served under Crown Prince Constantine while Princess Alice worked as a nurse for wounded soldiers. They were, however, especially affected by the First World War, which created division between different branches of their family as Greece set aside its neutrality due to the Triple Entente. Exile in Switzerland

In June 1917, King Constantine I was finally deposed and driven out of Greece by the Allies, who replaced him on the throne by his second son, the young Alexander. Shortly after these events, the Grand Ducal family of Hesse, to which Cecilie was closely related through her mother, was overthrown along with all the other German dynasties during the winter of 1918–1919. Brief return to Greece

On 2 October 1920, King Alexander, cousin of Cecilie, was bitten by a domestic monkey during a walk in Tatoi. The death of the sovereign caused a violent institutional crisis in Greece. Prince Andrew was received triumphantly in Athens on 23 November 1920, and his wife and four daughters joined him a few days later. At the same time, Princess Alice found out that she was pregnant again. The joy that surrounded this birth, however, was obscured by the absence of Prince Andrew, who joined the Greek forces in Asia Minor during the Occupation of Smyrna. In March 1921, the princesses attended in Athens the wedding of their cousin Helen to Crown Prince Carol of Romania. However, the military defeat of Greece against Turkey and the political unrest that it caused disrupted the life of Cecilie and her family. A month later, Prince Andrew was arrested before being tried by a military tribunal, which declared him responsible for the defeat of the Sakarya. The prince and his relatives hurriedly left Greece aboard HMS Calypso in early December 1922. Settled in a house adjoining that of Princess Marie Bonaparte, the family depended for seven years on her generosity, and two other aunts of Cecilie: first Princess Anastasia and then Lady Louis Mountbatten. Every Sunday, the family was received for lunch by Princess Marie Bonaparte and Prince George of Greece and Denmark. Cecilie and her family also regularly met Prince Nicholas of Greece and Denmark and his wife Elena Vladimirovna of Russia, who had also chosen France to spend their time in exile with their daughters. Finally, they often saw their cousin Princess Margaret of Denmark, who settled in the Paris region after her marriage to Prince René of Bourbon-Parma. Engagement and family difficulties

Considered by her maternal grandmother, the Dowager Marchioness of Milford Haven, as the prettiest of the four daughters of Andrew and Alice, Cecilie made her debut in the United Kingdom, during the summer of 1928. Now Crown Princess of Sweden, her aunt Louise was planning to betroth her to Crown Prince Frederik of Denmark, but the plan did not succeed. Since her childhood, Cecilie had in fact been in contact with her cousins, Princes Georg Donatus and Louis of Hesse, whom she first met in 1919, while she was living in exile in Switzerland. At that time, Cecilie was just 18 years old and Georg Donatus, the pretender to the throne of Hesse, was 23. The happiness of the princess was however clouded by the situation of her mother, whose mental health deteriorated sharply after the celebration of her silver wedding anniversary with Prince Andrew, in 1928. Distraught by the situation, Prince Andrew finally made the decision to place his wife in a sanatorium. He took advantage of his family's stay in Darmstadt, on the occasion of the celebration for Cecilie's official engagement in April 1930, to send Alice to a psychiatric hospital located in Kreuzlingen, Switzerland. Marriage and settling in Germany

Wedding

With her sister Sophie having become engaged almost at the same time as her to another member of the House of Hesse, Prince Christoph of Hesse, Cecilie made the preparations for her wedding in the company of her younger sister, aged 16. The ceremony brought together some fifty guests from all over Europe, but took place in the absence of the bride's mother Princess Alice, who was still hospitalized in Switzerland. Motherhood and reconnecting with Alice

After their marriage, Cecilie and Georg Donatus moved to Schloß Wolfsgarten, the main residence of Grand Duke Ernest Louis and his wife Grand Duchess Eleonore, since their deposition. In Hesse, the young couple led a relatively simple life, punctuated by frequent stays abroad. Cecilie was involved in several charitable organizations and became the head of Alice Frauen Verein, an association dedicated to women. She also quickly gave birth to three children: Prince Ludwig (born 25 October 1931), Prince Alexander (born 14 April 1933) and Princess Johanna of Hesse (born 20 September 1936). During this period, the relationship between Alice and her children became complicated. However, Alice was angry with those close to her for having her institutionalized and her anger manifested itself in fits of rage, which pushed her, for example, to tear up the photograph that Cecilie sent her after the birth of her first child. Once released from the hospital, Alice made known her desire to stay away from her family and four years passed before she put an end to her voluntary exile. In December 1936, Alice finally made the decision to reconnect with her family, and it was Cecilie that she got closer to first. Association with the Nazi Party and restoration of the monarchy in Greece

Prince Christoph of Hesse, Cecilie's brother-in-law, joined the Nazi Party in 1931 and the SS in 1932. For their part, the princes of Hesse kept their distance from the far-right party for a long time because the Grand Duke Ernest Louis had no sympathy for the Führer's ideas. While in Germany the establishment of the Nazi regime prevented any plans to restore the monarchy, in Greece the republic collapsed after the putsch of General Georgios Kondylis in November 1935. This event was the opportunity for Cecilie and her family to return, for the first time, to Greece after fourteen years of banishment. Titular Grand Duchess of Hesse and by Rhine

In 1937, Cecilie became pregnant again. However, the Grand Duke died a fortnight before the ceremony, on 9 October, making Georg Donatus the new head of House of Hesse-Darmstadt. Under these circumstances, the marriage of Prince Louis was postponed to 20 November, in order to give his family time to organize the funeral of Ernest Louis, which took place on 12 October. Death

With Prince Louis' wedding approaching, Cecilie and her family went to Frankfurt on 16 November 1937 to board a plane of the Belgian company Sabena which was to take them to London, via a stopover in Ostend where it was planned to pick up two other passengers. The small group, which consisted of Cecilie (eight months pregnant), Georg Donatus, their two sons Ludwig (aged 6) and Alexander (aged 4) and the Dowager Grand Duchess Eleonore, was accompanied by Baron Joachim von Riedesel, chosen by Louis to be his witness, and Alice Hahn. Funeral

Despite the death of his family, Prince Louis married Margaret Campbell Geddes, in London, the day after the plane crash. Once back in Darmstadt, Louis and his wife adopted their niece, Johanna, the only child of Cecilie and Georg Donatus not to have taken part in the plane trip due to her very young age. Johanna, however, died of meningitis two years later, on 14 June 1939. Reconciled by tragedy, Andrew and Alice nevertheless continued separate lives after the funeral. The trauma of her daughter's death healed Alice, whose mental state returned to a completely normal level once the funeral was over. In popular culture

Commemoration

On 16 November 2017 in Darmstadt, the Hessian State Archives, in collaboration with the Foundation of the House of Hesse (Hessische Hausstiftung), held a commemorative ceremony in honor of the victims of the accident in Ostend. Documentaries

The plane crash that caused the death of Princess Cecilie and her family was recounted in the sixth episode of the documentary series Mémoires d'exil (1999) by Frédéric Mitterrand. TV series

The death of Cecilie and her family is also mentioned by the character of Prince Philip, in the third episode ("Windsor") of the first season of the series The Crown (2016), and by a journalist, in the second episode ("A Company of Men") of the second season (2017). In this episode, Princess Cecilie is portrayed by German actress Leonie Benesch. In this fictionalized version, the accident in Ostend is caused by the KGB, which wants to recover the jewels of Tsarina Alexandra Fedorovna, bequeathed to the House of Hesse-Darmstadt after the Russian Revolution.