The Crown PrinceThe Crown Princess


Princess Tomislav


Princess Alexander


Princess Elizabeth


Peter Karageorgevitch (Serbian Cyrillic: Петар Карађорђевић, romanized: Petar Karađorđević; born 5 February 1980), also known as Prince Peter of Serbia and Yugoslavia, is an American born Spanish-Serbian graphic designer and a member of the House of Karađorđević. Between his birth and his renunciation in 2022, he was known as the Hereditary Prince. Early life and education

Peter is the first son and the oldest child of the last Crown Prince of the former Kingdom of Yugoslavia, Alexander, and Princess Maria da Gloria of Orléans-Braganza. His godfather was Prince Alexander of Yugoslavia, a son of Prince Paul of Yugoslavia. His godmother is Anne, Princess Royal. After the divorce, his father married Katherine Clairy Batis later that year, while his mother married Ignacio, Duke of Segorbe later that year also. In July 2001, his father and step-mother moved to Belgrade, Serbia, FR Yugoslavia. Public life

Prince Peter attended the reburial of his grandparents King Peter II and Queen Alexandra, great-grandmother Queen Maria, and great-uncle Prince Andrew in the Royal Family Mausoleum at Oplenac on 26 May 2013. The Serbian Royal Regalia were placed over King Peter's coffin, having Peter placing the Karađorđević Crown. On 17 July 2015, Prince Peter and his brothers were present at their father's 70th birthday celebration in Belgrade. On 27 April 2022, Prince Peter renounced his title of Hereditary Prince – for himself and his descendants – in favor of his younger brother Philip. The ceremony took place in Seville at Casa de Pilatos in the presence of his mother Princess Maria da Gloria, his stepfather the 19th Duke of Segorbe, his brother Philip, his sister-in-law Princess Danica, his half sister the 54th Countess of Ampurias, Ljubodrag Grujić, member of the Crown Council, Chancellor of the Orders and the Herald of the House of Karađorđević, and Nikola Stanković, Chief of Staff of the Crown Prince. His father, Crown Prince Alexander, did not attend the event, and was dissatisfied with Peter's renunciation. Personal life

Prince Peter used to work in a field of graphic design and art direction in London and New York City.