Prince John of the United Kingdom (John Charles Francis; 12 July 1905 – 18 January 1919) was the fifth son and youngest of the six children of King George V and Queen Mary. He died at Sandringham in 1919 after a severe seizure, and was buried at nearby St Mary Magdalene Church. He was the youngest child and fifth son of George, Prince of Wales (later King George V), and Mary, Princess of Wales (later Queen Mary). John was christened on 3 August in the parish church of St Mary Magdalene at Sandringham, with the Reverend Canon John Neale Dalton officiating. Childhood and illness

Much of John's early life was spent at Sandringham with his siblings – ​Prince Edward (known as David, later King Edward VIII), Prince Albert (known as Bertie, later King George VI), Princess Mary, Prince Henry, and Prince George – ​under the care of their nanny Charlotte "Lala" Bill. In 1909, John's grandaunt, the Dowager Empress of Russia, wrote to her son Tsar Nicholas II that "George's children are very nice ... The little ones, George and Johnny are both charming and very amusing". John's aunt Princess Alice, Countess of Athlone described him as "very quaint and one evening when Uncle George returned from stalking he bent over Aunt May and kissed her, and they heard Johnny soliloquize, 'She kissed Papa, ugly old man!'" George V once told U.S. During his years at Sandringham, John exhibited repetitive behaviours as well as regular misbehaviour and insubordination; as one account put it, "he simply didn't understand he needed to ."


In 1912, Prince George, John's closest sibling, began St Peter's Court Preparatory School in Broadstairs. When Queen Alexandra wrote that John "is very proud of his house but is longing for a companion", Queen Mary departed from usual royal practice by arranging for local children to be brought in as playmates. Queen Mary wrote in her diary that the news was:

a great shock, tho' for the poor little boy's restless soul, death came as a great relief. broke the news to George and  motored down to Wood Farm. Mary later wrote to Emily Alcock, an old friend, that:

for  it is a great relief, as his malady was becoming worse as he grew older, & he has thus been spared much suffering. She added: "The first break in the family circle is hard to bear, but people have been so kind & sympathetic & this has helped us much." George described his son's death as "the greatest mercy possible". His funeral took place the next day at St Mary Magdalene parish church, with John Neale Dalton officiating. Queen Mary wrote:

Canon Dalton & Dr Brownhill  conducted the service which was awfully sad and touching. Although nominally private, the funeral was attended by staff from Sandringham House; "every single person on the estate went and stood around the gates and his grave was absolutely covered in flowers." Queen Alexandra wrote to Queen Mary that "now  two darling Johnnies lie side by side". Legacy


Edward, who was 11 years older than John and had hardly known him, regarded his brother's death as "little more than a regrettable nuisance." He wrote an insensitive letter to Queen Mary, now lost, to which she did not reply. In her final diary reference to John, Mary wrote simply: "miss the dear child very much indeed." She gave Winifred Thomas several of John's books, inscribed "In memory of our dear little Prince." Bill kept a portrait of John above her mantelpiece, together with a letter from him that read "nanny, I love you." 
In the 21st century, John's seclusion has been cited as evidence of the Windsors' "heartlessness". At the time of Edward VIII's abdication, an attempt was made to discredit Albert, now George VI, by implying that he suffered from falling fits like John.