Queen Anne-Marie


Queen Sofía of Spain


Marina, consort of Prince Michael


Pavlos, Crown Prince of Greece, Prince of Denmark (Greek: Παύλος Ντε Γκρες, romanized: Pavlos de Grèce; born 20 May 1967), is a Greek financier who is the former heir apparent to the defunct throne of Greece, becoming the Head of the Royal House of Greece upon his father's death on 10 January 2023. Pavlos was Crown Prince of Greece and heir apparent to the Greek throne from birth until the monarchy's abolition. Pavlos was born in Athens as the second child and eldest son of the last King of Greece, Constantine II, and his wife Queen Anne-Marie. Pavlos was born into an unstable era for Greek politics, just shy of turning eight months old when he and his family were sent into exile, after Constantine II staged a failed counter-coup against the military junta. They first lived in Rome, before eventually settling in Copenhagen, where his family lived with Pavlos's maternal grandparents, King Frederik IX and Queen Ingrid of Denmark. Although they were in exile since December 1967, his parents continued to officially reign as King and Queen of the Hellenes from 1967 until 1973, when the military junta abolished the Greek monarchy and established the Third Hellenic Republic as its successor state. They have five children: Maria-Olympia, Constantine-Alexios, Achileas-Andreas, Odysseas-Kimon, and Aristides-Stavros. Queens Margrethe II of Denmark and Sofía of Spain are his aunts, and Kings Felipe VI of Spain and Frederik X of Denmark are his first cousins. He was the second child and first son of King Constantine II and Queen Anne-Marie of Greece. Constantine II had ascended the throne on 6 March 1964, aged 23, following the death of his father and predecessor, Paul, so Pavlos was crown prince from birth. His maternal grandparents were Frederik IX of Denmark and his queen consort, Ingrid of Sweden. Pavlos displaced his older sister, Alexia, as heir to the throne due to Greece's order of succession adhering to male-preference primogeniture. Crown Prince

Pavlos was born into a turbulent era in Greek politics, barely a month after a coup d'état which ended democratic rule in Greece over the king's objections on 21 April 1967, ushering in a military junta, led by Georgios Papadopoulos. In December of that year, Constantine attempted a counter-coup that failed due to planning mistakes, leaks, and insufficient military support. Pursued by the junta, Constantine fled with his wife, children, mother and sister to Rome. They then went to Copenhagen and lived with Anne-Marie's mother, Queen Ingrid. From 1967 to 1973, Greece officially remained a monarchy, with a regency appointed while the king lived in exile. Following the discovery and suppression of a "wide-ranging" anti-junta movement, just before its outbreak, among the ranks of the mostly royalist Navy, Papadopoulos, on 1 June 1973, declared Greece a presidential republic with himself as president and proclaimed a referendum for 29 July 1973 on the issue of the monarchy. The referendum was held without opposition and its result confirmed the regime change, with Constantine becoming "officially" deposed. On 17 November 1974, after the fall of the dictatorship, the 1974 Greek legislative election was held, resulting in a victory for Constantine Karamanlis and his New Democracy party. Constantine announced that he "respects" the "decision of the Greek people." Yet, from 1975 until early 1978 he was involved in conspiracies to overthrow the government and the republican constitution via a military coup, which eventually did not materialize. He and Anne-Marie had been living with their family in London for several years. On 11 May 1994, the Greek Government under prime-minister Andreas Papandreou renounced the Greek-citizenship status of Pavlos, alongside Constantine, and the rest of the former royal family through law 2215/1994. The law stated that Constantine's Greek-citizenship status, and accordingly his family's, could only be restored under specific conditions, including the selection of an explicit surname. The following year, while sharing a house in Washington, DC, he and his cousin, Felipe VI of Spain, then Prince of Asturias, attended Georgetown University, where both obtained a Master of Science in Foreign Service. Head of the Greek royal family

Following the death of his father on 10 January 2023, Pavlos delivered Constantine's eulogy during the funeral ceremony and carried his coffin with his brothers, sons and nephews at the burial. A rumour circulated that Pavlos intended to permanently relocate to Greece, but this was later denied by the spokesperson of the former Greek royal family, Ivi Macris, as "completely false". In the interview, Pavlos thanked the public for their respect towards the Greek royal family and said that those who crowded the funeral, whether they were "monarchists or not", "paid tribute to a historical personality, a part of Greek history." When asked about the role he sees himself upholding in Greek society, Pavlos explained that he would "not take on an official role", but will "uphold the family's exemplary." He added that his eldest son Constantine-Alexios would not take on any official role either, but would "follow his grandfather's example and be a good man."


Pavlos issued a statement about the Tempi train collision in February 2023, which caused the death of almost 60 people, styling himself Head of the former Royal House of Greece following Constantine's death. The statement read: "Today all of Greece is mourning. Soon after, as Pavlos was leaving Athens that month, it was revealed that he and his family had been searching for a home in Greece, with Pavlos telling journalists that he had not "found a house yet". In April 2023, Pavlos attended a Greek Orthodox Easter service in the Hamptons, where his sons Constantine-Alexios and Odysseas-Kimon were holding the Epitaphios. Pavlos also announced that he was now living in Greece again, which is what he "always wanted to". He explained that the opportunity to live in Greece occurred as his job allowed for overseas work. Denmark's family name is not that. It is one of the castles of the family's origin." He explained that throughout his life, he never introduced himself with a last name, but rather called himself "Pavlos of Greece". Between January and February 2024, Pavlos and his family attended three memorial services to mark the one year anniversary of Constantine's death — one in Athens and two in London, including a thanksgiving service. On 28 September 2024, Pavlos served as a groomsman at the wedding of Princess Theodora and Matthew Kumar at the Metropolitan Cathedral. Pavlos's mother, Anne-Marie, did not apply, as she was reportedly "not interested". Ultimately, the surname of "Ντε Γκρες" (transliteration of De Grèce, meaning "of Greece") was chosen. It was reported by the royal family that this surname was chosen as it was the one used by the late Prince Michael of Greece and Denmark, and so was the "only familiar one" to them. The Communist Party of Greece and PASOK also criticized the government's decision. The couple has five children: Maria-Olympia (b. 1996), Constantine-Alexios (b. 1998), Achileas-Andreas (b. Titles, styles, and honours

From birth, Pavlos was the heir apparent to the throne of Greece and as such he was referred to as the Crown Prince of Greece with the style of Royal Highness. Through his male-line descent from Christian IX of Denmark, he is also a Prince of Denmark with the style of Highness. He is the eldest son of the King of Greece, grandson of the King of Denmark and great-grandson of the King of Sweden, all living and enthroned when he was born. His paternal aunt, Sofía, was Queen consort of Spain and his paternal first cousin, Felipe VI, is the current King of Spain. His maternal aunt, Margrethe II, was the reigning Queen of Denmark and his maternal first cousin, Frederik X, is the current King of Denmark. Pavlos is a scion multiple times of Queen Victoria and King Christian IX, who were dubbed the "grandmother of Europe" and "father-in-law of Europe" respectively, due to royal intermarriage. As a result, he descends from Christian IX of Denmark through three of his children; in the male line through his second son, George I of Greece, in the female line through his eldest son, Frederik VIII of Denmark, and through King Christian's youngest daughter, Princess Thyra. He also descends thrice from Queen Victoria; once through her third son, Prince Arthur, and twice through her eldest daughter, Victoria, Princess Royal.