King Juan Carlos IQueen Sofía


The Duchess of Soria and HernaniThe Duke of Soria and Hernani


The Dowager Duchess of Calabria


Infanta Elena, Duchess of Lugo (Elena María Isabel Dominica de Silos de Borbón y de Grecia; born 20 December 1963), is the first child and eldest daughter of King Juan Carlos I and Queen Sofía. As the eldest sister of King Felipe VI, Elena is the third in the line of succession to the Spanish throne, behind her nieces, Leonor, Princess of Asturias and Infanta Sofía. On 3 March 1995, on the occasion of her marriage to Jaime de Marichalar y Sáenz de Tejada, Lord of Tejada, her father gave her the title of Duchess of Lugo. She is the first member to be born in a hospital from King Juan Carlos I's family and the eldest child of Juan Carlos I, the former Spanish monarch, and Queen Sofía (born Princess of Greece and Denmark). Afterwards, in the late 1980s, King Juan Carlos ordered the construction of stables and a riding arena at the Royal Palace of Zarzuela so that his daughter could practice her hobby in the palace. The most important are Felipe de Zuleta y Alejandro from 2006 to 2015, an official of the Royal Guard and brother of the Duke of Abrantes, private secretary of Queen Letizia from 2014 to 2024, and Luis Astolfi Pérez de Guzmán, a former boyfriend and currently a close friend of hers. She shares this hobby with her daughter, Victoria, Grandee of Spain, as well as watching bullfighting. Marriage and children

Elena met Jaime de Marichalar y Sáenz de Tejada, Lord of Tejada, son of the Amalio de Marichalar y Bruguera, 8th Count of Ripalda, for the first time in 1987 in Paris. It was the first royal wedding in Spain since the wedding of King Alfonso XIII and Princess Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg in 1906. Also, to celebrate the occasion, King Juan Carlos gave Infanta Elena the title of Duchess of Lugo. The couple has two children: Felipe de Marichalar y Borbón (born 17 July 1998) and Victoria de Marichalar y Borbón (born 9 September 2000) were born at Ruber International Hospital in Madrid. As children of an Infanta of Spain, Elena's children are Grandees of Spain. On 21 January 2010, the divorce was registered at the Civil Registry of the Spanish Royal Family and it was officially announced on 9 February 2010; Jaime de Marichalar was no longer permitted to use the ducal title nor was he considered an official member of the Spanish Royal Family. They represented the Crown at official events such as the National Day, the wedding of Princess Astrid of Belgium, the re-burial of Queen Victoria Eugenia at El Escorial, the state visit of Mexican president Miguel de la Madrid to Spain, and the 1984 Prince of Asturias Awards ceremony, among others.