Born Prince Ingolf of Denmark (Danish: Prins Ingolf Christian Frederik Knud Harald Gorm Gustav Viggo Valdemar Aage til Danmark), he appeared likely to some day become king until the constitution was changed in 1953 to allow females to inherit the crown, placing his branch of the dynasty behind that of his first cousin Princess Margrethe and her two younger sisters. Family

Ingolf was born at Sorgenfri Palace, Sorgenfri, as His Highness Prince Ingolf of Denmark. He was the elder son of Hereditary Prince Knud, by his wife and first cousin, Hereditary Princess Caroline-Mathilde. Loss of place in succession

From the 1947 death of his grandfather, Christian X of Denmark, Ingolf stood only behind his father in the order of hereditary succession to the throne and was expected to become king in his turn. His father, Prince Knud, was then the heir presumptive, due to succeed Ingolf's uncle King Frederik IX, who had three daughters but no sons. In 1953, the Constitution of Denmark was amended to allow cognatic primogeniture. The new law made thirteen-year-old Princess Margrethe the new heir presumptive, placing her and her two sisters before Prince Knud and his family in the succession. Prior to his son's wedding, Prince Knud sought to convince his brother that Ingolf should be allowed to retain his royal title after marriage. Ingolf married firstly Inge Terney (21 January 1938 in Copenhagen – 21 July 1996 in Velje), daughter of Georg Terney (1906–1977), hardware storer, and wife Jenny Kamilla Hansen (1908–1990), on 13 January 1968, at Kongens Lyngby Kirke, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark. After being widowed, he married secondly Sussie Hjorhøy-Pedersen (born 20 February 1950 in Copenhagen), daughter of Frederick Walter Pedersen and wife Ruth Hjorhøy, who thus became "Her Excellency Countess Sussie of Rosenborg" on 7 March 1998, at Egtved, Denmark. Public role

Count Ingolf usually takes part in major public events associated with the royal family; he and Countess Sussie attended the May 2004 wedding of Crown Prince Frederik at Copenhagen Cathedral, and the subsequent reception at Fredensborg Palace. On some occasions, they are listed as members of the royal family, such as when they attended the wedding of Prince Joachim in 2008 and the luncheon to celebrate the 75th birthday of Prince Henrik at Fredensborg Palace on 11 June 2009 On other occasions, such as the celebrations for the Queen's 70th birthday, they are listed along with non-royal guests, but even in these cases at the ceremonies themselves they are usually given precedence immediately after his sister Princess Elisabeth of Denmark. In 1964, when still Prince Ingolf, he acted as groomsman to his third cousin, Constantine II of Greece, on his marriage to Princess Anne-Marie of Denmark (also Ingolf's first cousin). His sister, Princess Elisabeth, did not receive such an allowance, though she remained in the line of succession.