Georg Friedrich Prinz von Preussen (born 10 June 1976, as Georg Friedrich Ferdinand Prinz von Preußen) is a German heir who is the current head of the Prussian branch of the House of Hohenzollern, a dynasty that ruled over the German Empire and the Kingdom of Prussia until near the end of World War I. He is the great-great-grandson of Wilhelm II, the last German Emperor and last King of Prussia, who abdicated and went into exile upon Germany's defeat in World War I in 1918. Education and career

Georg Friedrich is the only son and eldest child of Louis Ferdinand Prinz von Preussen (1944–1977) and Countess Donata of Castell-Rüdenhausen (1950–2015). Born into a mediatised princely family, his mother later became Duchess Donata of Oldenburg when she married secondly Duke Friedrich August of Oldenburg, who had previously been married to her sister-in-law Princess Marie Cécile of Prussia. He also administered the Princess Kira of Prussia Foundation, founded by his grandmother Grand Duchess Kira of Russia in 1952, now administered by his wife. Until 30 December 2025, Georg Friedrich owned a two-thirds share of his family's original seat, Hohenzollern Castle, with the head of the Swabian branch, Karl Friedrich, Prince of Hohenzollern, owning the remaining third. He also owns the Princes' Island in the Great Lake of Plön. Preußische Biermanufactur (Royal Prussian Beer Manufactory) producing a Pilsner brand called Preussens. Georg Friedrich continues to claim compensation for land and palaces in Berlin expropriated from his family, a claim begun in March 1991 by his grandfather Prince Louis Ferdinand of Prussia under the Compensation Act (EALG). House of Hohenzollern

Georg Friedrich succeeded his grandfather, Louis Ferdinand, as Head of the Royal House of Prussia, a branch of the House of Hohenzollern, on 26 September 1994. On 19 October 2005, a German regional court ruled that Georg Friedrich was indeed the principal heir of his grandfather, Louis Ferdinand (who was the primary beneficiary of the trust set up for the estate of Wilhelm II), but also concluded that each of the children of Louis Ferdinand was entitled to a portion of the Prussian inheritance. Family

In 2011, Georg Friedrich married Princess Sophie of Isenburg. On 20 January 2013, Georg Friedrich's wife, Sophie, gave birth to twin sons in Bremen, Carl Friedrich Franz Alexander and Louis Ferdinand Christian Albrecht. This sparked a public debate about the legitimacy of these claims and the role of the Hohenzollern during and before the Nazi regime in Germany, specifically Crown Prince Wilhelm's involvement. Ancestry

References

External links

@media screen{html.skin-theme-clientpref-night .mw-parser-output .sister-inline-image img{filter:invert(1)brightness(55%)contrast(250%)hue-rotate(180deg)}}@media screen and (prefers-color-scheme:dark){html.skin-theme-clientpref-os .mw-parser-output .sister-inline-image img{filter:invert(1)brightness(55%)contrast(250%)hue-rotate(180deg)}} Media related to Georg Friedrich, Prince of Prussia at Wikimedia Commons