Princess Sophie Louise of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach (20 March 1911 – 21 November 1988) was a princess of the House of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach. She was born in Weimar, the eldest child and only daughter of William Ernest, Grand Duke of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach, by his second wife, Princess Feodora of Saxe-Meiningen. As a relative of Wilhelmina of the Netherlands, Sophie was invited to the 1937 wedding of her daughter, Princess Juliana, as a bridesmaid. Juliana's wedding

Invitation

Preparations for the wedding of Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands's only child Crown Princess Juliana to the German Prince Bernhard of Lippe-Biesterfeld were under way in 1937 when a small diplomatic scandal occurred. The affair was the result of Wilhelmina's opinion that the wedding be a family affair; consequently, she did not invite foreign royalty unless she was personally familiar with them. These included Sophie herself (her and Bernhard's second cousin), Duchess Thyra of Mecklenburg-Schwerin (her second cousin), Grand Duchess Kira Kirillovna of Russia (her first cousin once removed), Duchess Woizlawa of Mecklenburg (her cousin), and two of Bernhard's first cousins, Princess Sieglinde of Lippe and Princess Elisabeth of Lippe. The German Nazi government, apparently outraged that their flag was not used in festivities related to the wedding, refused to release the passports of Sophie, along with those of Bernard's cousins Princesses Sieglinde and Elizabeth zur Lippe. Wilhelmina and the Dutch government responded that because they believed the wedding to be a private, family affair, the use of the German flag would be inappropriate; they instead opted to fly the Dutch national flag alongside the flag of Bernhard's family. German displeasure also applied to their national anthem; Wilhelmina and the Dutch government saw no need in playing it at the wedding, as Bernhard was now a Dutch citizen, and thus no longer held German citizenship. Princess Sophie was replaced as bridesmaid by Baroness von Heeckeren van Kell, one of Juliana's ladies-in-waiting. Consequently, his sister Marie Antoinette controversially succeeded him as Princess of Schwarzburg.