The House of Kinsky (formerly Vchynští, sg. Kinský; German: Kinsky von Wchinitz und Tettau) is a prominent European noble family originating in the Kingdom of Bohemia. During the Thirty Years' War, the Kinsky family rose from minor nobles to comital rank (1628) and later princely status (1747) under the rule of the Habsburgs. Over the next three centuries they were only minor nobles with estates in northwestern Bohemia, around the village of Vchynice (German: Wchinitz) near Litoměřice. A branch of the family was elevated to Princes of the Holy Roman Empire by Empress Maria Theresa in 1747. Confiscation and restoration

After World War II, estates of the princely (Choceň) branch of the family were confiscated under the Decree of the President of Republic, as the late Prince Ulrich (1893–1938) was reproached for his declared German nationality and active collaboration with the Sudeten German Party. From 2003, the senior member of the princely branch, Prince Ulrich's son Franz Ulrich, sued the Czech Republic for return of the properties confiscated in 1945 only because, he maintained, the confiscation implicitly labeled his family as historical traitors against Czechoslovakia and as willful collaborators during the Nazi occupation. The Kinsky family has denied such charges, arguing that Prince Franz Ulrich was just two years old at the time of his father's death and that he and his mother, Princess Kinsky (née Baroness Mathilde von dem Bussche-Haddenhausen — whose family reputedly plotted against Hitler), had left the occupied country and went into exile in Argentina shortly afterwards. Prince Franz Ulrich died in 2009 in Buenos Aires after a brief illness and was survived by his widow, née Countess Lena Hutten-Czapska. Notable members

Heads of the princely family

Distinguished relatives

Residences

Like many of the aristocratic families of the Habsburg monarchy, the Kinskys were great landowners and patrons of the arts. They employed (between 1713 and 1716) the celebrated architect Johann Lukas von Hildebrandt to build their residence Palais Kinsky in Vienna, which remained in the family's ownership until 1987. In addition to this home, from the 18th century the family also owned the vast baroque Kinsky Palace in Old Town Square, Prague. The Kinskys also own Burg Heidenreichstein in Lower Austria, which they inherited. Support of Beethoven

As a patron of the arts, along with Archduke Rudolf and Prince Joseph Lobkowitz, Ferdinand Kinsky contributed 1,800 fl. Stud farms

In 1723, Emperor Charles VI ordered the Kinsky family to develop their stud farms and breed horses of such quality as to provide superior mounts for the officers of the elite cavalry regiments of the empire. In 1776, the quality of the Kinsky horses was further improved by bloodstock from England. In 1838, Count Oktavian Kinsky expanded still further the Kinsky studs, famous throughout Europe for their high equine quality, known as the Kinsky horse.