Princess Feodora of Saxe-Meiningen (Feodora Viktoria Auguste Marie Marianne; 12 May 1879 – 26 August 1945) was born at Potsdam, the only child of Bernhard III, Duke of Saxe-Meiningen and Duchess Charlotte (the eldest daughter of Emperor Friedrich III of Germany and Empress Victoria). Early life

Princess Feodora was born on 12 May 1879 as the only child of Bernhard, Hereditary Prince of Saxe-Meiningen, and his wife Princess Charlotte of Prussia, herself the eldest daughter of German Crown Prince Frederick William and Crown Princess Victoria. The new baby was the first grandchild of the Crown Prince and Princess, and through her mother was also the first great-grandchild of the British Queen Victoria. Preferring to return to enjoying social life in Berlin, she declared after Feodora's birth that she would have no further children, dismaying her mother, Crown Princess Victoria. Charlotte loved to travel, and often left her daughter with Vicky at Friedrichshof, whom she viewed as the source of a convenient nursery. The Crown Princess, for her part, loved having the chance to spend time with her eldest granddaughter. While her parents stayed at Buckingham Palace, Feodora stayed with her young cousin Princess Alice of Battenberg at the home of the Dowager Duchess of Buccleuch at Whitehall, allowing the girls to watch the royal procession as it made its way to Westminster Abbey. The widowed, exiled Prince Peter Karađorđević, thirty-six years older than Feodora, proposed himself as a suitor, though this was likely a bid to gain support for succeeding to the Serbian throne. In the mid-1890s, Princess Feodora was considered as a potential bride for King Alexander I of Serbia. Her mother's maternal first cousin Alfred, Hereditary Prince of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, the only son of Charlotte's friend (and Feodora's maternal grandaunt) the Duchess of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, was also considered. Several months after returning from Queen Victoria's Diamond Jubilee celebrations in June 1897, Feodora became engaged to Prince Heinrich XXX Reuss of Köstritz (1864-1939), with the betrothal announced in early October. Born in Castle Neuhoff, he was the youngest son of Prince Heinrich IX Reuss of Köstritz (1827-1898) and Baroness Anne Marie Wilhelmine Helene of Zedlitz und Leipe (1829-1907). Princess Feodora was the only great-grandchild of Queen Victoria and only grandchild of German Empress Victoria to be married in their lifetimes; she married in 1898 and both the Queen and the German Empress died in 1901. Prince Henry was a captain in the Brunswick Infantry Regiment No. After the war concluded with Germany's defeat, Feodora's father's rule over the Duchy of Saxe-Meiningen was ended.