Zara Anne Elizabeth Tindall (née Phillips; born 15 May 1981) is a British equestrian, Olympian, and member of the British royal family. She is the daughter of Anne, Princess Royal, and Captain Mark Phillips, and the eldest niece of King Charles III. Tindall won the individual eventing world title at Aachen in 2006 and was later named BBC Sports Personality of the Year. She married former rugby union player Mike Tindall in 2011, and the couple have three children. Early life and education

Zara Anne Elizabeth Phillips was born at 8:15 pm on 15 May 1981 at St Mary's Hospital, London. She has an elder brother, Peter, and two younger half-sisters, Felicity Wade (née Tonkin), from her father's affair with Heather Tonkin; and Stephanie Phillips, from his second marriage to Sandy Pflueger. Phillips attended Beaudesert Park School in Stroud, Gloucestershire, and Port Regis School in Shaftesbury, Dorset, before following other members of the royal family in attending Gordonstoun School in Moray, Scotland. Equestrianism

After leaving university, Phillips began to pursue an equestrian career, following in the footsteps of her parents. Phillips missed the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens after her horse was injured during training. Riding Toytown, Phillips won individual and team gold medals at the 2005 European Eventing Championship at Blenheim. The British Olympic Association selected Phillips and Toytown for the 2008 Olympic Games in Hong Kong; however, Toytown sustained an injury during training and she withdrew from the team. On 25 October 2008, Phillips fell from her horse, Tsunami II, at the 15th fence of a cross‑country event in Pau, France, breaking her right collarbone. In July 2010, Musto launched a range of equestrian clothing designed by Phillips, named ZP176 after her team number when she first represented Great Britain. Phillips competed at the 2012 London Olympic Games on High Kingdom, winning a silver medal in the team event. She stopped using her maiden name in March 2016 and competed as Zara Tindall for the first time during her unsuccessful attempt to qualify for the 2016 Rio Olympic Games. In 2017, Tindall finished third at the Kentucky Three-Day Event on High Kingdom, who retired from competition in 2018. Charity work

Tindall frequently supports and attends events for a range of charitable causes, particularly those connected with spinal injuries, equestrianism, and children's welfare. Tindall has appeared at events for The Caudwell Charitable Trust, which supports children with special needs, disabilities, and serious illnesses. The following year, she became patron of the Mark Davies Injured Riders Fund. In April 2020, Tindall participated in the Equestrian Relief initiative to help provide additional personal protective equipment for National Health Service workers. Other activities

In June 2015, Tindall launched an equestrian-themed jewellery collection, named "Zara Phillips Collection", in collaboration with Australian designer John Calleija. On 17 September 2022, during the period of official mourning for Queen Elizabeth II, Tindall joined her brother and six cousins to mount a 15-minute vigil around the coffin of the Queen, as it lay in state at Westminster Hall. Personal life

Phillips met rugby union player Mike Tindall, who was then playing for the England national team, during the squad's Rugby World Cup-winning campaign in Australia in 2003. As required at the time by the Royal Marriages Act 1772, the Queen gave her consent to the marriage at a meeting of the Privy Council on 10 May 2011. The Tindalls lived in Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, before moving to Aston Farm, a seven-bedroom property adjoining the Princess Royal's Gatcombe Park estate. Their first child, Mia Grace, was born on 17 January 2014 at Gloucestershire Royal Hospital and was 16th, later 23rd in the line of succession. A second daughter, Lena Elizabeth, was born on 18 June 2018 at Stroud Maternity Hospital and was 19th, later 24th, in the line of succession. Their son, Lucas Philip, was born on 21 March 2021 at the family home on the Gatcombe Park estate and was 22nd, later 25th, in the line of succession. Tindall is a godmother to Prince George of Wales, the son of her cousin William, Prince of Wales. In December 2000, before her marriage, Phillips was involved in a serious car crash near Bourton-on-the-Water, escaping injury after overturning her Land Rover.